Title: A pipeline for identifying small noncoding RNA (sRNA) candidates in bacteria

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
A pipeline for identifying small noncoding RNA (sRNA) 

# candidates in bacteria 

Auth ors: 

Sinda Elhedi  ͣ  , Kadidia Dite Selly N'Diayeª, et Jonathan Perreaultª 

ª INRS - Centre Armand -Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Laval, QC, H7V 1B7, Canada 

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint Abstract 

Bacterial small non -coding RNAs (sRNAs) are central post -transcriptional regulators, yet their 

computational identification suffers from high false -positive rates due to transcriptional noise 

and the absence of canonical coding features. 

We developed a three -stage pipeline integrating sRNA prediction (sRNA -Detect), transcription 

start site mapping (TSSAR, dRNA -seq), and Rho -independent terminator detection (RNIE), 

applied across nine phylogenetically diverse bacterial species spanning six  phyla. 

Sequential filtering achieved 1.4 to 33 fold precision improvements across nine species, 

reducing candidate sets by up to 99.6% while recovering known sRNAs at rates reflecting 

reference database depth (6% recall in S. aureus, 33 -34% in E. coli and S. ente rica) 

TSS and RIT constraints constitute universal, genome -size -independent biological filters that 

substantially enrich sRNA predictions across bacterial diversity. Precision variation across 

species reflects database incompleteness rather than pipeline failure , with unmatched 

predictions in poorly annotated organisms representing candidate novel sRNAs rather than 

false positives. RNA -seq coverage depth provides a reliable secondary indicator of biological 

relevance, though its interpretation requires accounting  for sequencing depth variation across 

datasets. 

Keywords : small regulatory RNA, transcription start site, differential RNA -seq, Rho -

independent terminator, bacterial gene regulation, computational prediction 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Introduction 

Small RNAs (sRNAs) are non -coding RNA molecules of 20 -500 nucleotides that serve as 

central post transcriptional regulators of bacterial physiology. Through base -pairing 

interactions with target mRNAs, these molecules control diverse cellular processes inc luding 

stress adaptation, quorum sensing, and virulence factor expression ( Storz et al., 2011, 

Gottesman & Storz, 2011 ). Their regulatory importance extends to iron homeostasis and 

antimicrobial resistance processes essential for bacterial survival in host  environments 

(Vanderpool & Gottesman, 2004; Massé & Gottesman, 2002 ). 

Bacterial sRNAs operate through two mechanistically distinct pathways. Cis -acting sRNAs are 

transcribed antisense to their target genes, exhibiting near -perfect complementarity that 

enables precise, gene -specific regulation through direct base -pairing. Thi s architecture allows 

rapid response to environmental changes with minimal regulatory complexity. In contrast, 

trans -acting sRNAs can originate from distant genomic loci and typically display limited 

complementarity with their targets, often requiring the  RNA chaperone Hfq to facilitate and 

stabilize regulatory interactions (Vogel & Luisi, 2011 ). Trans -acting sRNAs frequently 

coordinate multi -target regulons, enabling synchronized cellular responses to environmental 

fluctuations. 

Despite extensive characterization in model organisms such as  Escherichia coli  and 

Salmonella enterica  where 98 and 118 sRNAs have been experimentally validated, 

respectively,  as of 2022 ( Boutet et al. 2022 ), the vast majority of bacterial species remain 

poorly explored with regards to their sRNAs. This knowledge gap stems from limited 

transcriptomic coverage and the absence of specialized computational frameworks adapted 

for taxonomically diverse bacteria.  Addressing this disparity is critical for understa nding 

bacterial adaptation, pathogenesis, and metabolic versatility across ecological niches. 

The widespread adoption of high -throughput RNA sequencing (RNA -seq) has transformed 

bacterial transcriptomics, enabling genome -wide sRNA discovery across numerous species 

(Wang et al., 2009) . Computational tools such as sRNA -Detect leverage RNA -seq data to 

identify candidate sRNAs based on expression profiles, coverage uniformity, size constraints, 

and intergenic localization (Peña -Castillo et al., 2016). However, these expression -based 

appro aches consistently suffer from elevated false -positive rates due t o several inherent 

limitations: 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Transcriptional noise: RNA -seq captures all transcribed regions, including transient 

transcripts, degradation intermediates, and antisense transcription resulting from promoter 

read -through or spurious initiation. 

mRNA processing artifacts: Cleaved mRNA fragments can mimic authentic sRNAs in both 

size distribution and coverage patterns, particularly when derived from abundant transcripts. 

Functional ambiguity: Expression -based methods cannot distinguish between functional 

regulatory RNAs and non -functional transcriptional byproducts without additional biological 

context. 

Antisense contamination: Many predicted antisense sRNAs may represent transcriptional 

noise rather than bona fide regulatory elements with characterized functions; or novel 

functional antisense RNAs. 

The absence of transcriptional context, specifically transcription start sites (TSSs) and 

termination signals, makes it difficult to distinguish genuine regulatory sRNAs from spurious 

transcripts. This limitation has profound consequences for experimental  validation efforts, as 

researchers may expend considerable resources characterizing non -functional candidates. 

We hypothesized that integrating multiple layers of transcriptional evidence would substantially 

reduce false positives while maintaining sensitivity for genuine sRNAs. This approach exploits 

fundamental biological principles: most authentic sRNAs exhibit  discrete TSSs indicating 

independent transcriptional units and intrinsic terminators ensuring proper 3′ end formation 

(Jackson et al.2017). 

Transcription start site mapping through differential RNA -seq (dRNA -seq) provides single -

nucleotide resolution of transcription initiation by exploiting the differential sensitivity of primary 

(5′ -triphosphate) versus processed (5′ -monophosphate or 5’ hydr oxyl) transcripts to 5′ -

terminator exonuclease (TEX) treatment (sharma et al. 2010). 

Rho -independent terminators (RITs) represent the predominant transcription termination 

mechanism in bacteria. These structures consist of GC -rich hairpin loops followed by U -rich 

tracts that destabilize the RNA -DNA hybrid, triggering RNA polymerase pausing  and transcript 

release (Gusarov & Nudler 1999; d'Aubenton et al. 1991). Computational detection through 

covariance models implemented in RNIE (Gardner et al. 2011) allows homology searches 

independent of primary sequence conservation, as terminator struct ures exhibit characteristic 

architectural features recognizable across substantial phylogenetic distances. The presence 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

of canonical terminators downstream of predicted sRNAs provides strong support for authentic 

transcriptional units with defined 3′ boundaries (Brenes -Álvarez et al. 2016). 

We present a systematic evaluation of integrative sRNA prediction across nine 

phylogenetically diverse bacterial species: the Gram -positive models  Staphylococcus aureus 

USA300,  Bacillus amyloliquefaciens  FZB42, and the clinically critical nosocomial pathogen 

Clostridium difficile  630; as well as the epsilon -proteobacteria  Helicobacter pylori  26695 and 

Campylobacter jejuni  81116; the gamma -proteobacterial model organisms  Escherichia coli 

K-12 MG1655 and  Salmonella enterica  ST4/74; and the environmentally sig nificant species 

Shewanella oneidensis  MR -1 and  Methylorubrum extorquens  DM4. This phylogenetic 

breadth enables assessment of pipeline performance across diverse genomes, regulatory 

strategies, and database coverage levels. 

By systematically filtering sRNA predictions through TSS proximity requirements and 

terminator presence, we demonstrate substantial false -positive reduction while retaining 

experimentally validated candidates. Our specific objectives were to: 

Develop a robust computational framework integrating transcriptional context to reduce 

false -positive sRNA predictions 

Benchmark the approach on well -characterized organisms to validate effectiveness 

Apply the pipeline to less -characterized bacterial species to demonstrate broad applicability 

Quantify precision improvements achieved through systematic filtering 

Provide a flexible framework adaptable for diverse bacterial taxa and experimental 

conditions 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Materials and Methods 

Figure 1, presents an overview of the proposed bioinformatics pipeline, illustrating the main 

stages involved in the identification and validation of small non -coding RNAs (sRNAs). 

Figure  1:Pipeline presentation 

The workflow begins with the retrieval of datasets from publicly available repositories followed by sequence 

alignment against the target genome. Candidate sRNAs are then refined through the identification of 

transcriptional features, including transcripti on start sites (TSSs) by TSSAR and rho -independent terminators 

(RITs) by RNIE. Subsequent filtering steps are applied to retain high -confidence candidates, resulting in a final 

catalog of predicted sRNAs for downstream analyses and validation. 

Data collection and species selection 

We implemented a tiered validation strategy utilizing both well -characterized benchmark species 

and less -studied bacteria. This approach allowed validation against known sRNA repertoires while 

demonstrating applicability to understudied organisms. 

Nine phylogenetically diverse bacterial species were selected, spanning six phyla: three 

benchmark species with well -characterized sRNA repertoires ( Escherichia coli  K-12 MG1655; 

Staphylococcus aureus  USA300;  Salmonella enterica  Typhimurium ST4/74) and six test species 

representing understudied diversity  (Helicobacter pylori  26695;  Campylobacter jejuni  81116 ;

Methylorubrum extorquens  DM4;  Shewanella oneidensis  MR -1;  Clostridium difficile  630Δerm ; 

Bacillus amyloliquefaciens  FZB42). Publicly available RNA -seq and differential RNA -seq datasets 

were sourced from BioProjects (Table  S1  ). 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Read alignment 

RNA -seq reads for each species were aligned to their respective reference genomes using 

HISAT2 version 2.2.1 (Kim et al. 2015) with default parameters. Alignment files were converted to 

BAM format and sorted using SAMtools version 1.15 (Li et al. 2009). 

Transcription Start Site Identification Using TSSAR 

Differential RNA -seq (dRNA -seq) exploits the differential sensitivity of RNA 5′ ends to 5′ -terminator 

exonuclease (TEX) treatment. Primary transcripts retain 5′ -triphosphate ends and resist 

degradation, whereas processed transcripts with 5′ -monophosphate (and 5’ -OH) ends are 

selectively degraded. By comparing TEX -treated (+TEX) and untreated (−TEX) libraries, dRNA -

seq enables precise genome -wide identification of transcription start sites (Sharma et al. 2010). 

TSSAR Implementation 

TSSAR (Transcription Start Site Annotation Regime) (Sharma et al. 2010) identifies TSSs by 

modeling read start count differences between +TEX and −TEX libraries using Poisson and 

Skellam distributions. TSSAR assigns a differential score to each genomic pos ition, reflecting the 

statistical significance of enrichment in the +TEX library. 

Key parameters: 

The command line used to perform TSSAR analysis of dRNA -seq data was: 

. /TSSAR  --libP I<libraryP.sam>  --libM I<libraryM.sam> [ --score I<p|d>] [ --fasta I<genome.fa>] [ --

minPeak I<INT>] [ --winSize I<INT>] 

Where: 

--minPeak 3: Minimum read count required for TSS calling 

--score d: Differential scoring mode between +TEX and −TEX libraries 

--winSize 1000: Window size for peak scanning and background estimation 

We evaluated 13 discrete thresholds spanning four orders of magnitude (0 to 40,000) to capture 

the full dynamic range of TSS statistical confidence. This range encompasses low -confidence 

predictions (score < 100), moderate confidence suitable for explorato ry analysis (100 -1000), high 

confidence (1000 -2000), and extremely stringent thresholds for mechanistic studies (>2000). The 

geometric progression enables systematic evaluation of precision -sensitivity trade -offs across the 

confidence spectrum. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

sRNAs candidate prediction using sRNA -Detect 

Algorithm Principles 

sRNA -Detect  (Peña -Castillo et al., 2016),  identifies small RNA candidates based on uniform 

coverage patterns derived from RNA -seq read alignment data. The algorithm operates on the 

principle that authentic small transcripts should exhibit consistent read coverage across their 

entire length, disti nguishing them from fragmented mRNA degradation products or spurious 

transcription. 

Key Parameters: 

The command line used to perform sRNA -Detect analysis of RNA -seq data was: 

nextflow detect_filter_sRNA.nf  --alignmentDir  --annotatedGenomeFile  --outputDir  –output  --

idPrefix RCAP_rcs  --minLength 20  --maxLength 500  --minHeight 10 

--minLength 20: Minimum transcript length (nt) 

--maxLength 500: Maximum transcript length (nt) 

We also evaluated 13 discrete score thresholds to assess their impact on prediction precision. 

Higher thresholds retain only candidates with highly uniform coverage and strong expression, 

while lower thresholds capture candidates with moderate expression l evels. 

The initial sRNA candidates considered for the rest of the analysis are not raw tool outputs, 

but a pre -filtered set (sRNA -Detect separate and filter annotated RNA): predictions that 

overlap previously annotated features (rRNA,tRNA,tmRNA,RNase_P_RNA,prot ein_coding) in 

the corresponding GFF file were not retained . 

Integration strategy: TSS -sRNA Intersection analysis 

Predicted sRNAs candidates were intersected with TSS predictions using bedtools closest 

(Quinlan & Hall, 2010) with strand -specificity enabled and distance reporting. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Key parameters: 

The command line used to perform TSS intersection to predicted sRNAs was: 

bedtools closest  -a <FILE>  -b <FILE>  -s -D ref 

-s:  Strand -specificity 

-D ref:  Report distance with respect to the reference genome 

A critical pipeline parameter is the TSS distance threshold, defining the maximum allowable 

distance between an sRNAs 5′ start site and a TSS position. For this, we used a “TSS 

distance threshold” of  -60 bp upstream and +20 bp, downstream applied uniformly  across all 

species. The threshold ( -60 bp upstream, +20 bp downstream) is biologically motivated: 

Reverse Transcription (RT) performed on RNA prior to sequencing may not always reach the 

5′ end of the RNA, hence a margin of  -60 bp to account for this; and  in principle we do not 

expect any RT to go beyond the TSS, but to account for technical variability in TSS mapping 

precision due to library complexity or read depth and potential annotation uncertainties, a 

margin of +20 bp is accepted.  Only sRNAs with at least one TSS with a position that fell 

within  -60 bp upstream to +20 bp downstream of the predicted 5′ start position of the 

candidate sRNA (on the same genomic strand) were retained for downstream analysis. 

RNIE Implementation 

RNIE (Gardner et al. 2011) uses covariance models (CMs) to predict Rho -independent 

terminators short genomic sequences characterized by G+C -rich hairpin loops followed by a 

polyuridine tail that cause bacterial RNA polymerase to pause and terminate transcr iption. 

Two Operating Modes: 

Genome Mode: Optimized for high -throughput genome annotation with rapid scanning (~43 

kb/s), very low false positive rate (~1.7 FP/M), sensitivity of 0.70, 

Gene Mode: Optimized for individually annotating downstream regions of genes with higher 

sensitivity (0.83) but slower scanning (~1 kb/s) and higher false positive rate (~9.6 FP/MB) 

Implementation parameters: 

TSS -associated sRNA intervals were extended 150 nucleotides downstream to capture 

potential terminator regions.RNIE was executed using built -in covariance model: erpin -rho.cm 

Key parameters: 

The command line used to perform an RNIE analysis on intersected TSS candidates was: 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

perl rnie.pl  -m erpin -rho.cm  -f <sequences>  -g –sensitive (sensitive for gene mode) 

Parameters: 

-m: Covariance model 

-g:  Produce output in GFF format 

--sensitive| --gene:  Run in targeted -region mode. Uses a parameter set tuned for high 

sensitivity.  Primarily for answering the question: "Could there be a Rho independent terminator 

following my gene of interest?" 

Each candidate region received a bit score quantifying similarity to canonical RIT models. 

Sequences were extracted using bedtools getfasta with strand -specificity maintained. For RIT -

associated sRNAs, final coordinates combined the original sRNA 5′ start  with the detected 

terminator 3′ end, creating complete transcriptional units with defined boundaries. 

Initial predictions employed cmsearch (embedded in RNIE) with default bit score threshold ( -

T parameter) optimized for reference organisms. However, since our dataset comprises 

phylogenetically diverse bacterial species that may not have been fully represe nted in the 

benchmark sets used to calibrate cmsearch defaults, we assessed whether adjusting the bit 

score threshold could improve prediction recall without introducing excessive false positives. 

Notably, preliminary validation studies in our laboratory i dentified a novel sRNA (sRNA 1969; 

by Emillie Boutet, 2023) that was not detected using the default threshold parameters. We 

therefore re -ran predictions with the bit score threshold ( -T parameter) adjusted to 4 across all 

species, a more permissive thresh old calibrated to enhance sensitivity for non -benchmark 

organisms and capture previously unidentified sRNAs such as sRNA 1969. 

Database Sources 

sRNA sequences were validated to database sources by species. Moreover, sRNAs from 

Rfam were also used. 

Test species 

E. coli  K-12 MG1655 : A list containing a total of 116  E. coli  sRNAs combined from BSRD and 

Rfam (Li et al. 2013,  Kalvari et al., 2021) 

Salmonella enterica  ST4/74 : A list containing 143  S.enterica  sRNAs from BSRD and Rfam 

(Li et al. 2013,  Kalvari et al., 2021) 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Staphylococcus aureus  USA300 : SRD (Staphylococcal Regulatory RNAs Database) (Sassi 

et al. 2015) with 88 distinct sRNA entries covering strain USA300_FPR3757 

Less characterized species 

Bacillus amyloliquefaciens  FZB42:  BSRD containing 28  Bacillus  spp sRNAs 

Helicobacter pylori  26695 : BSRD containing 80  Helicobacter  spp. sRNAs +1 sRNA from 

Rfam (Li et al. 2013,  Kalvari et al., 2021) .

Campylobacter jejuni  81116 : Manually curated database from Dugar et al,.2013 study 

containing 21 experimentally characterized  C. jejuni  sRNAs by Northern blot (Table  S3  )

Shewanella oneidensis  MR -1: Rfam and NCBI annotations sRNAs (17 sRNAs) 

Methylorubrum extorquens  DM4 : RiboGap database (Naghdi et al. 2017) containing 7 

characterized  Methylorubrum  sRNAs. 

Clostridium difficile  630 : Rfam and experimentally validated (Northern blot) predicted sRNAs 

from a study by Soutourina et al. 2020 results in 14 sRNAs. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

BLAST Implementation 

Sequences were blasted to known sRNAs databases through the command line 

blastn  -task blastn -short  -query <sequences>  -db <database>  -outfmt 6  -evalue 1e -1 -

perc_identity 95 

Key parameters: 

blastn -short is optimized for the alignment of short nucleotide sequences, such as small RNAs, 

by using a reduced word size and adjusted scoring parameters. It increases sensitivity for 

detecting matches of short sequences while maintaining specificity 

To reduce weak and potentially spurious matches, a bit score filter (> 60) was applied to all 

BLAST results, ensuring that only alignments with significant sequence homology were 

considered. (nonfiltered results are presented in Table  S4 )

Threshold Optimization and Statistical Analysis 

We implemented a comprehensive grid search approach, evaluating all combinations of 

predicted sRNAs and TSS scores across 13 thresholds, resulting in 13 × 13 = 169 combinations 

per species. Additionally, we analyzed sRNA predictions without TSS filtering t o establish 

baseline performance. 

For each parameter combination, we computed: 

• Number of TSS predictions retained at given TSS score 

• Number of sRNA predictions retained at given sRNA score 

• Number of sRNAs -TSS intersections 

• Number of BLAST -validated candidates (intersections with database homology for known 

sRNAs) 

• Number of sRNAs with RIT structures detected downstream 

• Number of BLAST -validated sRNAs with RIT structure 

Detailed results are provided in  Table  S2 .

Precision and Recall Calculation: 

𝑃  = 𝑇𝑃  

> 𝑇𝑃 +𝐹𝑃

, where: 

P (precision) = proportion of predicted sRNAs that are correct 

TP (True Positives) = predicted sRNAs that match known sRNAs 

FP (False Positives) = predicted sRNAs that do not match known sRNAs 

TP + FP = total number of predicted sRNAs 

If precision is known: 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

𝐹𝑃  = 𝑇𝑃  ⋅ 1

𝑝  − 1 where FP=False Positives 

Recall= 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑  𝑠𝑅𝑁𝐴𝑠 

𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑛  𝑠𝑅𝑁𝐴𝑠 

where: 

Recovered sRNAs = known sRNAs correctly predicted 

Known sRNAs = total number of annotated/expected sRNAs 

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint Results 

Pipeline overview and Recovery Strategy 

Our pipeline proceeds through three sequential filtering steps (Figure 2 ).  First sRNA candidates 

are predicted from RNA -seq data using sRNA -Detect. Second, these predictions are filtered by 

proximity to experimentally mapped TSSs from TSSAR retaining only transcripts with defined 

transcriptional start points. Third, retained can didates are extended downstream and analyzed 

with RNIE to identify Rho -independent terminators. Candidates possessing both features, 

termed final sRNA candidates, represent our final high confidence predictions. For most 

datasets, the starting number of ca ndidates is unacceptably high to explore them one by one (up 

to ~30,000), but these numbers are reduced by one to two orders of magnitude by applying 

filters.  

> Figure 2: Summary of Pipeline Performance
> Flow diagram illustrating the three sequential filtering stages of the sRNA discovery pipeline: (B) Histogram showing
> the three steps progression: Initial candidates: predicted sRNAs candidates by sRNA -Detect,TSS intersected
> candidates : predicted sRNAs ca ndidates intersected with TSS, Final candidates: predicted sRNAs candidates
> intersected with TSS and have RIT downstream.

Overview of Pipeline Performance Across Species 

To contextualize pipeline output, we distinguish two categories of species (Table  S1  ). 

Benchmark species  (E. coli , S. aureus , S. enterica ) harbor well -documented sRNA repertoires 

against which precision and recall provide meaningful performance indicators.  Initial candidate 

pools were large (7,812 –11,019) with moderate -to -low baseline precision (1.2 –1.9%). Sequential 

TSS and RIT filtering s ubstantially enriched this output:  S. aureus  rose from  1.19%  baseline 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to  3%  precision across  171 candidates , enabled by the comprehensive SRD reference.  E. 

coli  reached  7%  final precision while recovering  38 of 116  known sRNAs (33%  recall).  S. 

enterica  recovered  48 of 143  reference entries (34%  recall) as showed on Figure  3.

Figure  3:Precision Progression Across Three Filtering Stages and Nine species 

Precision (fraction of predictions matching known sRNAs) is shown at three successive pipeline stages: baseline 

sRNA -Detect predictions (Baseline), TSS intersection with baseline (+TSS), and additional RIT filtering (+TSS+RIT). 

Test species  (M. extorquens , S. oneidensis , B. amyloliquefaciens , H. pylori , C. jejuni , C. 

difficile ) are organisms for which the sRNA repertoire is largely uncharacterized. By this criterion, 

the pipeline succeeds consistently.  M. extorquens , whose initial pool of  29,947  candidates would 

be impossible to validate one by one, is reduced to  112  final candidates, a  99.6%  reduction 

while recovering 1 of 7  deposited reference sRNAs (14%  recall).  S. oneidensis  is reduced 

from  6,137  to  163  candidates (97.3%  reduction).  C. difficile  candidates are reduced 

from  452  to  22  candidates with  86% precision . H. pylori  et C. jejuni  move from 536 and 319 

initial candidates respectively to 32 and 34 (22% and 9% precision respectively and  reaching 

14% recall for both)  (Figure 3).  For all test species, the filtered candidate sets constitute a 

prioritized, biologically motivated shortlist for experimental validation. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Precision -Recall Trade -off 

Sequential TSS and RIT filtering reduced candidate sets by 89 –99% while maintaining good 

recall of known sRNAs  (Figure 4).  Among the analyzed species,  S. enterica  and  E. coli  exhibited 

the highest recall values, recovering approximately 34% and 33% of known sRNAs, respectively. 

However, their precision remained relatively low (approximately 7 –8%), reflecting the large 

number of remaining candidates. In contrast,  C. difficile  achieved the highest precision (~59%) 

while maintaining a moderate recall (~14%), i ndicating highly selective candidate retention.  C. 

jejuni  showed intermediate performance, with a recall of approximately 14% and a precision of 

9%.  H. pylori  displayed the lowest recall (~7%) but achieved a relatively high precision (~22%), 

suggesting a conservative filtering strategy that retained few but enriched candidates.  S. 

oneidensis  and  M. extorquens  exhibited low precision despite recalls of approximately 12% and 

14%, respectively. 

Overall, the sequential application of TSS and RIT filters effectively reduced the candidate 

search space while preserving a substantial fraction of known sRNAs. The increase in precision 

observed in several species suggests that combining transcription st art site evidence with 

intrinsic terminator prediction preferentially removes false -positive candidates while retaining 

biologically relevant sRNAs.  

> Figure 4:Performance Trade -offs: Recall vs Precision
> Recall (x -axis) = % of known sRNAs recovered. Precision (y -axis) = % of predictions homologous (at least
> 95%_identity) to known sRNAs in the corresponding species, as determined by BLAST.
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Validation of final candidates with RNA -seq data 

To evaluate the transcriptional support for computational predictions, final potential candidate 

sRNAs were assessed against RNA -seq data through read coverage analysis, whereby mean 

read depth was calculated for each candidate and used as a quantitative i ndicator of expression 

level. Candidates were subsequently classified into four tiers based on mean depth thresholds: 

highly expressed,moderately expressed,weakly expressed, and poorly expressed, reflecting 

candidates with insufficient RNA -seq evidence and  likely representing computational artifacts.   

> Figure 5:sRNAs classification by RNA -seq coverage depth across nine bacterial species
> Distribution of sRNA candidates across four confidence tiers based on mean read depth: Highly expressed (≥50
> reads/position, black), moderately expressed (10 –50 reads, medium -dark grey), weakly expressed (2 –10 reads,
> medium -light grey), and poorly expresse d (<2 reads, near -white, grey). Each bar represents the total number of
> candidates per species (after applying TSS and RIT filters); colors indicate the proportion in each confidence tier.
> Species are ordered by decreasing total candidate count from top to bottom.

As illustrated in Figure  5 the classification profile of validated sRNA candidates varied markedly 

across species, reflecting the combined influence of sequencing depth and intrinsic sRNA 

biology. Species datasets with the highest mean depth  — H. pylori  (2524.4 reads/position), 

C.difficile ( 1999 reads/position),  S. enterica  (287.7 reads/position), and  E. coli  (354.9 

reads/position)  — displayed bars dominated by highly expressed sRNAs classification, 

demonstrating that deep coverage enables consistent read accumulation above the ≥50 -read 

threshold required for high -confidence assignment. In contrast, medium -depth dataset as 

C.Jejuni  (156.7 reads/position) and low -depth datasets such as for  Shewanella  (32.3 

reads/position) and  Methylorubrum  (41 reads/position) exhibited proportionally large weak 

fractions, suggesting that genuine sRNA transcripts were present but insufficiently covered to 

surpass classification thresholds, reflecting a depth artifact rather than true absence of 

expression.         

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 6:Effect of score threshold on final sRNAs Discovery: well -Annotated vs poorly annotated species
> Comparison of E. coli K-12 (A) and C. jejuni (B), for final numbers of retained candidates, precision and % recall of
> known sRNAs within these respective species.(plots of all species are presented in Figure S2 in Supplementary
> materials).

To evaluate the trade -off between prediction accuracy and candidate retention, computational 

predictions were subjected to progressively stringent filtering at score thresholds ranging from 0 

to 40,000 (Figure  S1 ). 

To be mentioned, restricting the analysis to high -scoring predictions from the outset would have 

prematurely eliminated candidates before transcriptional unit filtering could be applied. Valid 

sRNAs are supported by RNA -seq coverage at the validation stage .

In  Figure  6. A, E.coli  demonstrates a progressive, reduction in candidate numbers with 

increasing score threshold, declining from 598 candidates at threshold 0 to 34 candidates at 

threshold 2000 (a 94% reduction). Crucially, precision improves steadily across the entire 

threshol d range, rising from 7 % at score 0 to 29% at score 2000. This consistent improvement 

indicates that higher -scoring predictions are systematically more likely to represent genuinely 

annotated sRNAs, suggesting the scoring algorithm effectively captures fea tures that correlate 

with true sRNA biology. Conversely, recall is reduced gradually from one stringency level to the 

next, declining gradually from 33% at threshold 0, to ~ 9 % at threshold 2000. 

In stark contrast,  C.jeju ni (Figure 6 .B) presents a markedly different filtering response, 

exemplifying prediction challenges in organisms with limited functional annotation and lower 

RNA -seq coverage depth. The candidate pool undergoes depletion at higher thresholds: 

declining from 34 candida tes at score 0 to zero candidates by score 1500. However, recall drops 

precipitously from 14% at threshold 0 to 4.5 % at score 100 and reaches zero by score 1500. 

BA

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

This collapse in recall demonstrates that aggressive filtering eliminates many true sRNAs from 

the candidate set, despite improving precision metrics. 

These observations and all species comparison (Figure 7 ) justify adopting a score threshold of 0 

in the main pipeline analysis across all species, reducing the risk that potentially meaningful 

candidates are prematurely discarded. 

Condition -dependent transcription shapes sRNA discovery in  Salmonella enterica  case 

To evaluate differential sRNA expression across growth conditions, RNA -seq data from 

Salmonella enterica  serovar Typhimurium ST4/74 were analyzed across five experimental 

samples from BioProject PRJNA215033 (Kröger et al., 2013): mid -exponential phase (MEP), 

early stationary phase (ESP), late stationary phase (LSP), SPI -2-inducing conditions (InSPI2), 

and a  pooled sample derived from 22 diverse environmental conditions (POOL).The pipeline 

was executed independently for each condition to capture condition -specific expression patterns.   

> Figure 7:Condition -Dependent sRNA Expression in S. enterica ST4/74
> Two complementary Venn diagrams comparing sRNA detection across five experimental datasets in Salmonella
> enterica serovar Typhimurium ST4/74. (A) Raw sRNA -Detect predictions before filtering. (B) Pipeline -filtered
> candidates (TSS + RIT). Five datasets prof iled: MEP (mid -exponential phase), ESP (early stationary phase), LSP (late
> stationary phase), InSPI2 (SPI -2-inducing conditions), and POOL (22 combined environmental conditions ( Kröger et
> al,2013).

Across all conditions, 1225 unique loci were identified, underscoring the complexity and plasticity 

of the sRNA landscape. Among these, only 135 candidates were consistently detected in all 

conditions, defining a relatively small core set of constitutively  expressed sRNAs. In contrast, 

423 loci were strictly condition -specific, while the remaining candidates were shared across 

subsets of conditions, indicating graded or context -dependent expression patterns. The number 

of detected loci varied markedly betwe en conditions, with POOL yielding the highest count (785), 

followed by ESP (669), InSPI2 (659), LSP (506), and MEP (443)  as shown in Figure 7 . However, 

the high yield observed in POOL primarily reflects the aggregation of signals from multiple 

environments rather than an increase in biologically coherent transcriptional programs. 

BA

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

A more informative pattern emerges when focusing on condition -specific sRNAs post filtering. 

ESP exhibited the highest number of unique candidates (165), substantially exceeding other 

conditions, including POOL (104), LSP (66), InSPI2 (47), and MEP (41 ) (Figure 7) 

Importantly, the pooled dataset, while increasing overall detection sensitivity, appears to dilute 

condition specificity by merging distinct transcriptional states. As a result, sRNAs detected in 

POOL may represent cumulative expression rather than conditi on -resolved regulation. 

These observations closely align with the previously reported distribution of condition -specific 

transcription start sites (TSS) in the same study (Kröger et al., 2013), reinforcing the idea that 

transcription initiation is a primary determinant of sRNA em ergence. Conditions enriched in 

unique TSS, such as ESP (34 candidates), tend to produce a higher number of specific sRNAs. 

Together, these results highlight a fundamental trade -off in sRNA discovery: while pooled 

datasets maximize sensitivity and broaden the detectable repertoire, analyses of individual 

conditions are essential to resolve regulatory specificity and uncover bio logically meaningful 

sRNA expression patterns. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Positioning of the pipeline relative to existing tools ( S. enterica  case study) 

For  Salmonella enterica , several sRNA prediction tools have been evaluated in the literature by 

Leonard et al. 2019, including ANNOgesic, APERO, DETR’PROK, GL, Nuss, TLA, Rockhopper, 

and sRNA -Detect.     

> Figure 8:Benchmarking sRNA Detection Methods in S. enterica —Precision versus Recall
> Precision and recall performance of eight published sRNA detection pipelines against this study's approach. Each
> point represents one method's operating point. Symbols: (white circle) = published tools; (black diamond) = this study.
> Published tools include ANNOgesic, APERO, DETR'PROK, GL, Nuss, TLA, Rockhopper, and sRNA -Detect. This
> study shows post filtering results.Precision for this plot is calculated by P=Models/Total predicted similarly to the
> study.

These approaches exhibit different trade -offs between recall and specificity: the best tools 

achieve a recall of approximately 0.75 –0.83 on their reference sRNA sets, but at the cost of 

hundreds to several thousands of predicted transcripts per species. Fo r example, sRNA -Detect 

alone predicts 17,662 transcripts in  S. enterica , of which 71 correspond to known sRNAs, 

resulting in a substantial burden of manual screening and experimental validation. 

In this context, our multi -layered pipeline, applied to  S. enterica , recovers 47 known sRNAs out 

of 84 models reported in Leonard et al. 2019, while reducing the final candidate set to 809 

regions. In other words, it maintains a recall of 0.5 on known sRNAs while decreasing by nearly 

100× the number of transcripts that ne ed to be examined compared with raw sRNA -Detect 

output. This combination of good recall with a restricted number of candidates shows that the 

systematic integration of TSS and Rho -independe nt terminators can turn a sensitive tool with 

limited specificity such as sRNA -Detect into a much more specific and experimentally tractable 

pipeline. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Discussion 

From raw predictions to significant candidates 

Expression -based tools like sRNA -Detect excel at sensitivity but struggle with specificity, 

predicting thousands of short transcripts where false positives scale dramatically with genome 

size. In the genome of  S.oneidensis  (4.97 Mb), 99% of predictions are noise; for  S.enterica 

(4.88 Mb), false -positive rates reach 88%. Rather than tuning statistical thresholds, our pipeline 

imposes two universal biological rules grounded in transcriptional mechanics: candidates must 

overlap experimentally mapped transcrip tion start sites (TSS), because independent genes 

begin at promoters; and possess Rho -independent terminators (RIT), because functional 

transcripts require defined 3′ boundaries. 

This sequential filtering delivered robust precision gains across nine phylogenetically diverse 

species, but the magnitude and interpretation of these gains differ fundamentally between two 

groups of organisms: those with large initial prediction sets ( S. aureus : 11,019;  E. coli : 9,335;  S. 

enterica : 7,812;  M. extorquen s: 29,947;  S. oneidensis : 6,137) where baseline precision is 

extremely low (0.03 –1.96%), and those where sRNA -Detect itself generates compact prediction 

sets ( H. pylor i: 536;  C. jejuni:  319;  C. difficile : 452) yielding comparatively higher baseline 

precision (2.82 –42.04%). This distinction is not incidental  — it reflects fundamental differences in 

genome -wide transcriptional complexity and the density of spurious transcriptional signals 

detectable by expr ession -based tools. In both groups, however, TSS and RIT filtering 

consistently enriched true positives and reduced candidate burden. 

Large prediction set species  — dramatic noise reduction 

For organisms where sRNA -Detect generates thousands to tens of thousands of candidates, 

baseline precision is necessarily low because the prediction space vastly exceeds the known 

sRNA complement.  Staphylococcus aureus  USA300 exemplifies this: 11,019 initial candidates 

yield only 1.19% baseline precision, yet sequential filtering reduces this to 171 final candidates 

(98.4% reduction) while recovering 5 of 88 known sRNAs (6% recall) at 3% final precision  — a

2.5 -fold impr ovement. Similarly,  M. extorquens  DM4  begins with 29,947 predictions (0.03% 

baseline precision), the largest initial set across all nine species, reflecting the combination of a 

large genome (7.0 Mb) and limited transcriptomic annotation; filtering reduces this to 112 

candidates (99.6% reduct ion), recovering 1 of 7 known sRNAs (14% recall) at 1% final precision 

— a 33 -fold improvement.  E. coli  K-12 MG1655 and  Salmonella enterica  ST4/74 follow the same 

pattern: from 9,335 and 7,812 initial predictions at 1.96% and 1.42% baseline precision 

respe ctively, filtering yields 598 and 809 final candidates at 7% final precision, recovering 38 of 

116 (33% recall) and 48 of 143 (34% recall) known sRNAs.  Shewanella oneidensis  MR -1 and 

Bacillus amyloliquefaciens  FZB42 similarly benefit, with candidate reductions exceeding 97% 

and final precisions of 1 –2%. 

Compact prediction set species  — precision already elevated at baseline 

In contrast,  H. pylori , C. jejuni , and  C. difficile  produce far fewer initial candidates (536, 319, and 

452 respectively), which directly explains their higher baseline precision relative to the large -set 

species. This is not evidence of superior sRNA -Detect performance in these organisms per se, 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

but rather reflects reduced transcriptional complexity, smaller genome sizes (1.67, 1.64, and 

4.11 Mb respectively), or a lower density of spurious transcriptional signals detectable under the 

profiled conditions.  Clostridioides difficile  achieves the highest baseline precision of any species 

at 42.04% (190 of 452 initial predictions matching known sRNAs), rising to 59% after sequential 

filtering across 22 final candidates  — a 1.4 -fold improvement recovering 2 of 14 known sRNAs 

(14% recall ).  Helicobacter py lori  reaches 22% final precision across 32 RIT -filtered candidates, a 

3.8 -fold improvement from 5.78% baseline, recovering 6 of 81 known sRNAs (7% recall). 

Campylobacter jejuni  achieves 9% final precision across 34 candidates, a 3.2 -fold improvement 

from 2.82% baseline, recovering 3 of 22 known sRNAs (14% recall). Importantly, while these 

species show smaller absolute fold -improvements, this reflects their already -elevated basel ines 

rather than reduced pipeline effectiveness. 

Database reference and Performance Gaps 

Recall varied substantially across all nine species, and this variation reflects annotation depth far 

more than pipeline performance. The database landscape varies enormously:  E. coli  K-12 has 

116 validated sRNAs;  S. enterica , 143 entries;  S. aureus , 88 distinct entries from the SRD 

(Staphylococcal Regulatory RNAs Database); and  H. pylori,  81 BSRD entries. These organisms 

have been subjected to decades of intensive transcriptomic investigation, including multiple 

rounds of RNA -seq, dRNA -seq, and experimenta l validation (Storz et al. 2011, Sharma et al. 

2010), providing reference sets comprehensive enough to meaningfully benchmark recall. 

In stark contrast,  M. extorquens  DM4 has only seven characterized sRNAs deposited in 

RiboGap. This is not surprising:  M. extorquens  has received comparatively little transcriptomic 

attention, and sRNA annotation in non -model alphaproteobacteria lags far behind that of 

enterobacteria (Boutet et al. 2022). Genome -wide surveys of well -characterized bacteria suggest 

that dozens to over on e hundred sRNAs are typical for organisms of comparable genome size 

(Sharma et al. 2010), implying that the seven deposited e ntries for  M. extorquens  DM4 represent 

a small fraction of its true sRNA repertoire. This annotation gap directly explains apparent low 

recall: pipeline predictions matching genuine but unannotated sRNAs inevitably register as false 

positives against an incomplete reference set. 

Similarly,  C. jejuni  (22 sRNAs from manually curated literature),  B. amyloliquefaciens  (28 BSRD 

entries), and  S. oneidensis  (17 annotated sRNAs) represent understudied genomes where 

sRNA discovery lags. For these species,  unmatched predictions represent genuine discoveries 

awaiting experimental validation rather than pipeline errors  — an opportunity for new sRNA gene 

discovery that is structurally invisible to precision -based metrics. 

Capturing Divergent Terminators Through Threshold Calibration 

Default RNIE (infernal covariance) models, calibrated on well -represented bacterial lineages, 

miss species -specific Rho -independent terminator variants. Relaxing the cmsearch score 

threshold from default 16 to 4 expanded the number of candidates sRNAs acro ss all nine 

organisms. Critically, this relaxation recovered sRNA1969 in  M. extorquens  DM4 a sRNA 

previously validated experimentally in our laboratory (Boutet, 2023) but undetectable under 

default stringency. This recovery provides direct empirical support for the hypothesis that 

threshold relaxation rescues biologically real sRNAs that ar e systematically excluded when the 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

detection model is applied to organism underrepresented in its training data, and that the 

expanded candidate pool is not composed exclusively of false positives. 

The magnitude of candidate expansion varied across organisms in a manner consistent with 

both phylogenetic distance from the RNIE training set and nucleotide composition bias. 

Expansion was most pronounced in AT -biased  H. pylori  (32 -fold increase), substantial in 

enterobacteria like  E. coli and S. enterica  (~ 3 -fold expansion), and minimal in in C . jejuni  ,

despite a comparable genome size to  H. pylori , this may reflect a greater reliance on Rho -

dependent termination in  C. jejuni , resulting in a reduced den sity of Rho -independent terminator 

structures detectable by RNIE. While Rho -dependent termination is documented across bacteria 

(Ciampi 2006), genome -wide quantification of termination pathway usage in  C. jejuni  remains 

limited. 

Expression Depth and multi condition analysis 

RNA -seq coverage depth emerged as a reliable indicator of sRNA biological relevance among 

the expanded candidate set recovered at RNIE score threshold 4. Across all nine species, 

35.7% of sRNA candidates (750 of 2101) met the highly expressed criterion (me an depth ≥50 

reads/position) 

Mean coverage depth per candidate was computed over TSS - and RIT -delimited boundaries 

using samtools coverage, and a threshold of ≥50 reads/position was applied to define high -

confidence transcriptional support. This threshold is absolute rather than datas et -normalized and 

should be interpreted accordingly:Datasets with the highest mean depth  — H. pylori  (2524 

reads/position),  C. difficile  (1999 reads/position),  E. coli  (355 reads/position), and  S. enterica 

(288 reads/position)  —were dominated by candidates  exceeding the ≥50 reads/position 

threshold. It should be noted, however, that this "highly expressed" category reflects sequencing 

coverage depth rather than intrinsic biological expression level, and varies across the RNA -seq 

projects analysed herecandid ates. In contrast, low -depth datasets such as  S. oneidensis  (32 

reads/position) and  M. extorquens  (41 reads/position) exhibited proportionally large weakly 

expressed fractions, suggesting that genuine sRNA transcripts were present but insufficiently 

covered to surpass classification thresholds a sequencing depth artifact rather than true absence 

of ex pression. 

To evaluate condition -dependent sRNA expression, the pipeline was applied independently to 

five transcriptomic datasets from  Salmonella enterica  serovar Typhimurium ST4/74 (BioProject 

PRJNA215033; Kröger et al., 2013): mid -exponential phase (MEP), early stationary phase 

(ESP), late stationary phase (LSP), SPI -2-inducing conditions (InSPI2), and a pooled sample 

derived from 22 diverse environmental  conditions (POOL). 

Across all five conditions, 1225 unique loci were identified, revealing the breadth and plasticity of 

the  S. enterica  sRNA landscape. Of these, only 135 (11%) were shared across all five conditions 

simultaneously, defining a small constitutively expressed core. In stark contrast, 423 loci (35%) 

were strictly condition -specific  — detected in exactly one condition and abse nt from all others 

demonstrating that the majority of the detectable sRNA repertoire is conditionally regulated 

rather than constitutively  expressed. Among individual conditions, the number of detected loci 

varied substantially: POOL yielded the highest count (785), followed by ESP (669), InSPI2 (659), 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

LSP (506), and MEP (443). The POOL dataset uniquely captured 104 loci undetected in any of 

the four individual conditions, reflecting aggregation of weak or transient transcriptional signals 

across 22 environments that fall below detection thresholds in an y single profiled condition. 

Condition -specific analysis revealed that ESP exhibited the highest number of unique candidates 

(165), substantially exceeding InSPI2 (47), LSP (66), MEP (41), and POOL (104). This 

enrichment of ESP -specific sRNAs is consistent with the extensive transcrip tional 

reprogramming that accompanies the transition to nutrient limitation and aligns with the finding of 

Kröger et al. (2013) that ESP generates the highest number of unique transcriptions start sites 

among all profiled conditions reinforcing that transc ription initiation is the primary determinant of 

condition -specific sRNA emergence. 

The pooled dataset, despite maximizing overall detection sensitivity, paradoxically exhibited 

reduced condition -specificity relative to individual growth phases. The high locus count in POOL 

reflects cumulative signal aggregation across 22 environments rat her than a coherent 

transcriptional program, complicating functional interpretation of candidates detected exclusively 

in this dataset. A single standard laboratory condition  — the most common experimental design 

in non -model organisms captures between 36%  (MEP: 443/1225) and 55% (ESP: 669/1225) of 

the total detectable repertoire, demonstrating that comprehensive sRNA discovery is structurally 

constrained by condition breadth. These findings underscore that multiplexed transcriptomics 

spanning diverse physi ological states is not optional but essential for approaching exhaustive 

sRNA cataloguing in environmentally responsive organisms such as  S. enterica .

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Limitations and Future Directions 

Despite its robustness, several limitations constrain the pipeline's scope. First, dRNA -seq data 

availability remains limited; organisms without these datasets cannot leverage TSS mapping 

unless an experimentally or computationally derived TSS list is avai lable from other sources. 

Second, RIT detection assumes Rho -independent terminators predominate for sRNAs; 

organisms with Rho -dependent termination or atypical terminator structures may suffer 

systematic underestimation, as potentially illustrated by  C. je juni  whose attenuated precision 

gain (9% final precision) despite a small initial prediction set suggests terminator detection 

limitations rather than expression -based noise. Third, condition sampling remains fundamental: 

even optimized pipelines cannot discove r sRNAs unexpressed under profiled conditions, 

capping maximum completeness at approximately 40% for single growth condition strategies. 

Fourth, database gaps persist across BSRD, NCBI, Rfam, and RiboGap, conflating 

methodological precision with refer ence incompleteness and systematically underestimating true 

recall in understudied organisms. 

Future sRNA discovery should pursue several complementary strategies. Multiplexed RNA -seq 

across diverse conditions  — spanning nutritional, oxidative, osmotic, and host -mimicking stress 

contexts  — would expand accessible repertoires and reveal condition -sp ecific regulatory 

programs, as demonstrated by Kröger et al. 2013. Direct interaction mapping through iRIL -seq 

or CLIP -seq (Holmqvist et al. 2016) would provide orthogonal functional validation of predictions, 

independent of sequence homology. Computationa l tools designed to detect Rho -dependent 

termination signatures should be incorporated into future pipeline versions to address the 

systematic sRNA -knowledge gap in organisms where this termination mode is prevalent. 

# Conclusion 

This study presents a systematic framework for improving bacterial small regulatory RNA 

(sRNA) prediction through sequential integration of transcriptional context. By coupling sRNA 

detection with transcription start site (TSS) mapping and Rho -independent  terminator (RIT) 

identification, we demonstrate substantial reductions in false -positive predictions while 

maintaining robust recovery of experimentally characterized sRNAs across phylogenetically 

diverse bacterial species. 

The pipeline achieves 1.4 - to 33 -fold precision improvements across nine bacterial species, with 

initial candidate sets ranging from 319 to 29,947 reduced to biologically tractable lists of 22 to 

809 prioritized candidates. A fundamental observation emergi ng from cross -species comparison 

is that baseline precision is primarily determined by the size of the initial prediction set rather 

than inherent biological differences between species. Organisms with compact initial prediction 

sets  — H. pylori (536), C.  jejuni (319), and C. difficile (452)  — display higher baseline precisions 

(2.82 –42.04%) simply because the ratio of known sRNAs to total predictions is more favorable. 

Conversely, species with large genomes or complex transcriptional backgrounds generating  tens 

of thousands of predictions  — M. extorquens (29,947), S. aureus (11,019), E. coli (9,335)  —

exhibit very low baseline precisions (0.03 –1.96%) despite harboring equivalent or greater 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

numbers of genuine sRNAs. This distinction is critical for correctly interpreting pipeline 

performance: fold -improvement is naturally larger for low -baseline species, while absolute final 

precision is naturally higher for compact -set species, but in both c ases the pipeline consistently 

enriches true positives and eliminates noise. 

Clostridioides difficile achieves the highest absolute final precision at 59% (22 final candidates 

from 452 initial predictions, 1.4 -fold improvement), while M. extorquens DM4 achieves the 

greatest fold -improvement at 33 -fold (112 final candidates from 29, 947 initial predictions, 99.6% 

reduction), recovering 1 of 7 known sRNAs (14% recall). Staphylococcus aureus USA300 

illustrates strong candidate reduction from 11,019 to 171 (98.4% reduction), recovering 5 of 88 

known sRNAs (6% recall) at 3% final precisio n. Escherichia coli K -12 MG1655 recovered 38 of 

116 known sRNAs (33% recall) at 7% final precision across 598 candidates, while Salmonella 

enterica ST4/74 recovered 48 of 143 (34% recall) at 7% final precision across 809 candidates  —

the highest recall val ues observed, consistent with their large and well -curated reference 

databases. 

The robustness of TSS and RIT filtering is genome -size and phylogeny -independent, reflecting 

biological principles rather than organism -specific tuning. Sequential application of these filters 

preferentially eliminates transcriptional noise  — degradation p roducts, spurious initiation, and 

promoter read -through  — while preserving true positives grounded in canonical promoter 

architecture and 3′ transcriptional termination. 

Relaxation of RNIE bit score thresholds from default parameters to  -T 4 recovered previously 

undetected sRNAs, including the experimentally validated sRNA1969 in M. extorquens, 

validating the hypothesis that standardized terminator models may miss species -specific 

variants. Such calibration may be a necessary compromise for non -model organisms 

underrepresented in terminator model training datasets, extending pipeline applicability across 

bacterial phylogeny. 

Precision variation across species correlates with both initial prediction set size and reference 

annotation completeness rather than methodological failure. H. pylori (81 BSRD sRNAs), E. coli 

(116 sRNAs), S. enterica (143 sRNAs), and S. aureus (88 SRD sRN As) have received decades 

of transcriptomic investigation providing dense reference sets, while M. extorquens (7 RiboGap 

entries), C. jejuni (22 sRNAs), S. oneidensis (17 sRNAs), and B. amyloliquefaciens (28 BSRD 

entries) represent understudied genomes whe re reference incompleteness systematically 

underestimates true recall. Lower apparent precision in these organisms likely reflects pipeline 

recovery of genuine sRNAs absent from incomplete reference sets. This distinction is critical: for 

organisms with sp arse annotation, unmatched predictions represent opportunities for new sRNA 

gene discovery rather than evidence of pipeline failure. 

RNA -seq expression depth emerged as a reliable secondary indicator of sRNA biological 

relevance, though its interpretation is dataset -dependent. Candidates supported by ≥50 reads 

per base exhibit consistent expression above noise thresholds, while cross -sp ecies comparisons 

require accounting for sequencing depth variation across projects. Multi -condition analysis of S. 

enterica across five conditions revealed that only 135 of 1225 unique loci (11%) were detected 

across all conditions simultaneously, while 4 23 loci (35%) were strictly condition -specific, 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

underscoring that comprehensive sRNA discovery requires multiplexed transcriptomics spanning 

diverse physiological contexts  — a structural constraint inherent to all prediction pipelines 

regardless of algorithmic sophistication. 

The integration of TSS and RIT constraints directly addresses documented limitations of 

expression -based tools: sRNA -Detect alone predicts 7,812 transcripts in S. enterica at 1.42% 

baseline precision (111 known sRNA matches). Our pipeline maintained 34% re call while 

reducing final candidates to 809, rendering high -throughput experimental validation tractable. 

Comparative benchmarking against published tools confirms that systematic incorporation of 

transcriptional context markers outperforms sensitivity -foc used alternatives, achieving superior 

precision -recall trade -offs particularly for non -model organisms. 

However, the pipeline's scope is constrained by fundamental limitations. dRNA -seq data 

availability remains restricted, and organisms relying predominantly on Rho -dependent 

termination  — potentially including C. jejuni  — exhibit reduced terminator recovery  density. 

sRNAs derived from post -transcriptional processing, including tRNA -derived fragments and 

UTR -derived RNAs, lack independent TSS and RIT signatures and remain undetectable by this 

framework. Condition -specific expression caps theoretical maximum s ingle -condition discovery 

rates at approximately 40%. 

Future efforts should pursue: (1) Multiplexed RNA -seq across diverse conditions to expand 

accessible sRNA repertoires; (2) Direct interaction mapping via iRIL -seq or CLIP -seq for 

orthogonal functional validation; (3) Incorporation of Rho -dependent terminat ion detection; (4) 

Integration of machine learning classifiers trained on experimentally validated sRNAs; and (5) 

Target prediction coupled to candidate assessment to reveal biological relevance independently 

of sequence homology. 

In conclusion, transcriptional context markers (TSS and RIT) constitute universal, sequence -

independent biological filters applicable across bacterial phylogeny. Their sequential integration 

substantially enriches sRNA prediction precision while maintainin g sensitivity for genuine 

regulatory molecules, providing a generalizable framework for improving bacterial RNA 

annotation and discovering novel regulatory elements in understudied organisms where dense 

reference annotation remains inaccessible. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research was enabled by computational resources provided by the Digital Research 

Alliance of Canada (formerly Compute Canada).  This research was in part funded by an NSERC 

discovery grant (RGPIN -2025 -06433)  Fondation  Armand -Frappier and CRIPA. 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

Sinda Elhedi: pipeline design, data analysis, writing.  Kadidia Dite Selly  N’Diaye: Contributing 

with data of  Methylorubrum extorquens ,J. Perreault: Supervision, writing  – review and editing. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

COMPETING INTERESTS 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

All RNA -seq datasets used in this study are publicly available through NCBI GEO and ENA 

repositories; accession numbers are provided in Table . Script and databases are available on 

GitHub : https://github.com/sindaelhedi/sRNA_TSS_RIT_pipeline.git 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# References 

Bischler, T., Tan, H. S., Nieselt, K., & Sharma, C. M. (2015). Differential RNA -seq (dRNA -seq) 

for annotation of transcriptional start sites and small RNAs in Helicobacter pylori. Methods (San 

Diego, Calif.), 86, 89 –101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.201 5.06.012 

Boutet, E., et al. (2022). Small RNAs beyond Model Organisms: Have we only scratched the 

surface?  International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 23(8), 4448. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23084448 

Boutet, Émilie. Découverte et caractérisation des ARN non codants régulateurs chez 

Methylorubrum extorquens, une bactérie au potentiel biotechnologique. Thèse de doctorat, 

Québec, Institut national de la recherche scientifique, Université du Québec, 2023, 210 p. 

Choe, D., Szubin, R., Dahesh, S. et al.  Genome -scale analysis of Methicillin -resistant 

Staphylococcus aureus USA300 reveals a tradeoff between pathogenesis and drug resistance. 

Sci Rep 8, 2215 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -018 -20661 -1

Ciampi, M. S. (2006). Rho -dependent terminators and transcription termination. Microbiology, 

152, 2515 –2528. https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.28982 -0

Fan, B., Li, L., Chao, Y., Förstner, K., Vogel, J., Borriss, R., & Wu, X. Q. (2015). dRNA -Seq 

Reveals Genomewide TSSs and Noncoding RNAs of Plant Beneficial Rhizobacterium Bacillus 

amyloliquefaciens FZB42. PloS one, 10(11), e0142002. 

https://doi.org/10.137 1/journal.pone.0142002 

Gardner, P. P., Barquist, L., Bateman, A., Nawrocki, E. P., & Weinberg, Z. (2011). RNIE: 

genome -wide prediction of bacterial intrinsic terminators. Nucleic Acids Research, 39(14), 5845 –

5852. 

Gottesman, S. (2004). The small RNA regulators of Escherichia coli. Annual Review of 

Microbiology, 58, 303 –328. 

Gottesman, S., & Storz, G. (2011). Bacterial small RNA regulators. Cold Spring Harbor 

Perspectives in Biology, 3(12), a003798. 

Gusarov, I., & Nudler, E. (1999). The mechanism of intrinsic transcription termination. Molecular 

Cell, 3(4), 495 –504. 

Holmqvist, Erik et al. “Global RNA recognition patterns of post -transcriptional regulators Hfq and 

CsrA revealed by UV crosslinking in vivo.” The EMBO journal vol. 35,9 (2016): 991 -1011. 

doi:10.15252/embj.201593360 

Jackson, L.A., Day, M., Allen, J. et al. Iron -regulated small RNA expression as Neisseria 

gonorrhoeae FA 1090 transitions into stationary phase growth. BMC Genomics 18, 317 (2017). 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864 -017 -3684 -8

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Kalvari, I., Nawrocki, E. P., Ontiveros -Palacios, N., Argasinska, J., Lamkiewicz, K., Marz, M., 

Griffiths -Jones, S., Toffano -Nioche, C., Gautheret, D., Weinberg, Z., Rivas, E., Eddy, S. R., Finn, 

R. D., Bateman, A., & Petrov, A. I. (2021). Rfam 14: expande d coverage of metagenomic, viral 

and microRNA families. Nucleic acids research, 49(D1), D192 –D200. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1047 

Kim, D., Langmead, B., & Salzberg, S. L. (2015).  HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory 

requirements.  Nature methods, 12(4), 357 –360. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3317 

Kröger, C., Colgan, A., Srikumar, S., Händler, K., Sivasankaran, S. K., Hammarlöf, D. L., et al. 

(2013). An infection -relevant transcriptomic compendium for Salmonella enterica serovar 

Typhimurium.  Cell Host & Microbe, 14(6), 683 –695. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2013.11.010 

Leonard, S., Meyer, S., Lacour, S., Nasser, W., Hommais, F., & Reverchon, S. (2019).  APERO: 

a genome -wide approach for identifying bacterial small RNAs from RNA -Seq data. Nucleic acids 

research, 47(15), e88. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz485 

Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N., Marth, G., Abecasis, G., 

Durbin, R., & 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup (2009). The Sequence 

Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 25(16), 2078 –2079. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352 

Massé, E., & Gottesman, S. (2002). A small RNA regulates the expression of genes involved in 

iron metabolism in Escherichia coli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(7), 

4620 –4625. 

Maucourt, B., et al. (2022). Genome -wide transcription start sites mapping in Methylorubrum 

grown with dichloromethane and methanol. Microorganisms, 10(7), 1301. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms10071301 

Naghdi, Mohammad & Smail, Katia & Wang, Joy & Wade, Fallou & Breaker, Ronald & Perreault, 

Jonathan. (2017). Search for 5′ -leader regulatory RNA structures based on gene annotation 

aided by the RiboGap database. Methods. 117. 10.1016/j.ymeth.2017.02.009. 

Peña -Castillo, L., Grüell, M., Mulligan, M. E., & Lang, A. S. (2016). Detection of bacterial small 

transcripts from RNA -seq data: a comparative assessment. Pacific Symposium on 

Biocomputing, 21, 456 –467. 

Quinlan, A. R., & Hall, I. M. (2010). BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic 

features. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 26(6), 841 –842. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033 

Sassi, M., Augagneur, Y., Mauro, T., Ivain, L., Chabelskaya, S., Hallier, M., Sallou, O., & Felden, 

B. (2015). SRD: a Staphylococcus regulatory RNA database. RNA (New York, N.Y.), 21(5), 

1005 –1017. https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.049346.114 

Shao, W., Price, M. N., Deutschbauer, A. M., Romine, M. F., & Arkin, A. P. (2014). Conservation 

of transcription start sites within genes across a bacterial genus. mBio, 5(4), e01398 -14. 

https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01398 -14 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735529 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Sharma, C. M., Hoffmann, S., Darfeuille, F., Reignier, J., Findeiß, S., Sittka, A., ...  & Vogel, J. 

(2010). The primary transcriptome of the major human pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Nature, 

464(7286), 250 –255. 

Sharma, C. M., & Vogel, J. (2014). Differential RNA -seq. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 19, 

97 –105. 

Soutourina O, Dubois T, Monot M, Shelyakin PV, Saujet L, Boudry P, Gelfand MS, Dupuy B and 

Martin -Verstraete I (2020) Genome -Wide Transcription Start Site Mapping and Promoter 

Assignments to a Sigma Factor in the Human Enteropathogen Clostridioides diffici le.  Front. 

Microbiol. 11:1939. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01939 

Storz, G., Opdyke, J. A., & Zhang, A. (2004).  Controlling mRNA stability. Current Opinion in 

Microbiology, 7(2), 140 –144. 

Storz, G., Vogel, J., & Wassarman, K. M. (2011). Regulation by small RNAs in bacteria: 

expanding frontiers. Molecular cell, 43(6), 880 –891. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2011.08.022 

Thomason, M. K., Bischler, T., Eisenbart, S. K., Förstner, K. U., Zhang, A., Herbig, A., Nieselt, 

K., Sharma, C. M., & Storz, G. (2015). Global transcriptional start site mapping using differential 

RNA sequencing reveals novel antisense RNAs in Escherichia  coli. Journal of bacteriology, 

197(1), 18 –28. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.02096 -14 

Vanderpool, C. K., & Gottesman, S. (2004). Involvement of a novel transcriptional activator and 

small RNA in post -transcriptional regulation of the glucose phosphoenolpyruvate 

phosphotransferase system. Molecular microbiology, 54(4), 1076 –1089. 

https://doi .org/10.1111/j.1365 -2958.2004.04348.x 

Vogel, J., & Luisi, B. F. (2011). Hfq and its constellation of RNA. Nature reviews. Microbiology, 

9(8), 578 –589. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2615 

Vogel, J., & Sharma, C. M. (2005). How to find small non -coding RNAs in bacteria. Biological 

chemistry, 386(12), 1219 –1238. https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2005.140 

Wang, Z., Gerstein, M., & Snyder, M. (2009).  RNA -Seq: a revolutionary tool for transcriptomics. 

Nature reviews. Genetics, 10(1), 57 –63. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2484