Title: Diversity and evolution of the transcriptional regulatory networks of Pseudomonas strains revealed using machine learning

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
Diversity and evolution of the transcriptional 

# regulatory networks of Pseudomonas strains 

# revealed using machine learning 

Heera Bajpe 1, Ying Hefner 1, Richard Szubin 1, Jaemin Sung 1, Bernhard O. Palsson 1,2,3,4* 

1.  Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA 

2.  Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA 

3.  Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA 

4.  Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 

*Address correspondence to Bernhard O. Palsson:  bpalsson@ucsd.edu 

# Abstract 

The genus Pseudomonas consists of diverse and ecologically significant species that form close associations 

with both plants and animals. This genus is widely studied due to the clinically relevant Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa , model plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae , and non -pathogenic, industrially relevant 

Pseudomonas putida . The different metabolic and physiological capabilities of these species are enabled by 

their unique genetic makeup as well as varying regulatory mechanisms. To study the transcriptional basis for the 

diversity of the three species, we applied independent component analysis to strain -specific RNA -seq datasets 

to identify independently modulated gene sets (iModulons) and their condition -specific activity levels. We then 

mapped iModulons across strains based on their similarity in orthologous gene membership. Through 

comparison of iModulon gene membership and activities, we find that: (i) iModulons reveal shared and unique 

regulatory modalities across strains; (ii) unique adaptations in c ommon functions, such as translation and 

pyoverdine production/uptake, manifest through both differential iModulon gene membership and condition -

specific activation states in each strain ; (iii) iModulons facilitate comparison of stress responses at the systems 

level ; and (iv) iModulons highlight unique virulence factor enrichment and host -specific adaptations in human 

and plant pathogens. Altogether, comparing the modularized transcriptomes of the three strains provides unique 

and comprehensive insights into their di fferential evolution. 

# Importance 

Closely related bacterial species often have vastly different metabolic and physiological capabilities , yet the 

regulatory mechanisms underlying these adaptations remain poorly understood. Here, we compare the 

transcriptional regulatory networks of three representative Pseudomonas strains through cross -strain iModulon 

analysis . By comparing both iModulon gene composition and activity across s train s, we identify conserved 

regulatory modules alongside lineage -specific adaptations in functions associated with virulence, translation, 

iron acquisition , motility, and stress responses . Our results demonstrate that iModulons provide a genome -scale 

framework for comparing transcriptional regulation across closely related organisms, revealing regulatory 

innovations that are not apparent from genome comparisons alone. This work establishes a scalable approach 

for studying the evolution of bacterial tr anscriptional regulatory networks and the regulatory basis of niche 

specialization. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Introduction 

Pseudomonas is a complex genus containing the largest number of gram -negative bacterial species (1, 2) .

Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Pseudomonas syringae , and Pseudomonas putida are prominent species of this 

genus with high genomic similarity , but diverse functionalities (3) . P. aeruginosa is a n opportunistic pathogen that 

is a leading cause of nosocomial infections in humans (4) . P. syringae is a phyto pathogen responsible for 

agricultural and economic losses worldwide (3) . Finally, P. putida is a largely non -pathogenic saprophytic species 

of industrial relevance (5) . While the metabolic and physiological versatility of these pseudomonads is in part due 

to genomic differences, unique regulatory mechanisms enable surviv al in diverse niches. These regulatory 

mechanisms are controlled by the transcriptional regulatory network (TRN). Genome -scale TRN comparison is 

imperative to furthering our knowledge on the evolution of transcriptional regulation across this lineage. 

The TRN is a complex network of regulators and their target genes. TRN characterization is limited by bottom -

up approaches that tend to be tedious and expensive (6) . However, rapid growth of RNA -seq data and 

development of scalable data analytic tools has furthered efforts to deconvolute the TRN through top -down 

approaches. Independent component analysis (ICA), a blind source separation algorithm that identifies 

stat istically independent components in complex datasets, has been proven to successfully untangle bacterial 

transcriptomes (7 –10) . When appli ed to bacterial gene expression profiles , it identifies independently modulated 

gene sets called iModulons. ICA determines the gene composition of each iModulon and its activity across all 

conditions in the dataset. iModulons represent groups of genes that are coregulated under certain conditions, 

thereby corresponding to interpretable regulatory sig nals. Modularization of bacterial transcriptomes has 

previously enabled the discovery of regulons, characterization of unknown genes and regulons, and identification 

of transcriptomic trade -offs (6, 10, 11) .

We previously used iModulon analysis to study the TRNs of P. aeruginosa PAO1 (12, 13) , P. syringae pv. tomato 

DC3000 (14) , and P. putida KT2440 (5) . iModulon s of P. aeruginosa revealed biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) 

and multidrug resistance -associated regulation that contribute to virulence. iModulons of P. syringae provided 

insight into microbe -microbe and plant -pathogen interactions. Finally, iModulons of P. putida uncovered 

transcriptional responses relevant to industrial bioprocesses. iModulons from these pseudomonads have also 

guided metabolic engineering through the transfer of catabolic iModulons across species to confer novel 

substrate readiness on the recipien t strain (15) . These studies highlight strain -specific regulatory mechanisms 

that enable each strain to survive in their unique environments. 

iModulons also enable comparison of regulatory mechanisms across strains. A previous study comparing 

iModulons of seven strains across different genera uncovered conserved and lineage -specific regulatory aspects 

across the TRNs (16) . The application of this methodology to strains belonging to a single genus is expected to 

reveal common and unique TRN adaptations in closely related strains. Here, we use iModulon analysis to 

compare the TRNs of P. aeruginosa PAO1, P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000, and P. putida KT2440. We first 

expanded the RNA -seq datasets of each strain by adding samples generated under common conditions. Then ,

we used ICA to recompute strain -specific iModulon structures. 

Using the updated iModulon structures, we mapped iModulons across the strains based on orthologous gene 

membership and compared TRNs based on structure and activation state. We find that strain -specific 

adaptations within conserved functions , such as translation and pyoverdine biosynthesis/uptake, include unique 

iModulon gene membership and activation states. Additionally, motility -associated iModulons reveal strain -

specific requirements influenced by varying lifestyles of pathogens and saprophytes. Furthermore, genome -wide 

antibiotic stress response s var y across strains, with the P. aeruginosa TRN having specialized antibiotic stress 

response components . Our analysis thus details differential adaptation and evolution of TRNs across three 

Pseudomonas strains through the unique lens of iModulons. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Results 

# Reconstruction of iModulon structures 

Although a few conditions are roughly comparable across the datasets used i n our previous studies on the three 

strains , there is an overall lack of comparability (Supplementary Note S1). This results in differences in iModulon 

structures and hinders iModulon activation comparisons under identical conditions across strains. To address 

this limitation, we expanded each dataset by adding RNA -seq samples generated under common conditions. 

After quality control , each dataset contained eight newly generated common conditions, including nutrient 

starvation, metal ion stress, antibiotic stress, and oxidative stress (Supplementary Note S2). The datasets of P. 

aeruginosa , P. putida , and P. syringae were expanded to 431, 343, and 244 RNA -seq samples, respectively 

(Supplementary Table S1 -3). Principal component analysis reveals that growth conditions largely contribute to 

the separation between samples (Fig. 1A). 

After normalizing log 2[TPM] data to project -specific reference conditions, we applied ICA to each dataset (17) .

We extracted 107, 82, and 60 iModulons for P. aeruginosa , P. putida , and P. syringae , respectively (Fig. 1B, 

Supplementary Table S4 -6; Supplementary Note S3). Each iModulon represents a group of genes that are co -

regulated within the given condition -space. ICA provides iModulon gene composition s and activities across all 

conditions (Fig. 1C). iModulons correspond to the effects of transcription factors under conditions within the 

dataset, thus hav ing both statistical and biological significance. 

# iModulons enable genome -scale TRN comparison 

After curating and characterizing the iModulons, they were categorized based on regulator enrichment. 

iModulons that are significantly enriched for a single regulon were categorized as “regulatory”. The remaining 

iModulons were categorized as “biological” ( representing a biological function), “genomic” ( representing genomic 

features), “uncharacterized” (representing unknown cellular function s), or “technical” (containing a single highly 

weighted gene, likely linked to noise in gene expression). Comparison of regulator enrichment across strains 

reveals an overall lack in available regulatory annotations in P. syringae (Supplementary Fig. S1; Supplementary 

Note S4). 

The iModulon structures of all three strains capture diverse cellular functions, such as metabolism, stress 

responses, and translation (Fig. 1D -F). “Metabolic” iModulons dominate P. aeruginosa and P. putida , while 

“uncharacterized” iModulons dominate P. syringae (16). Together with the low count of “regulatory” iModulons 

identified in P. syringae , these findings highlight the lower level of TRN characterization for this strain. The 

availability of iModulon structures for all three strains provides a unique opportunity to improve characterization 

of the P. syringae TRN through cross -strain iModulon comparison, as detailed in Supplementary Note S5. 

Functional categorization of iModulons also reveals strain -specific characteristics. For instance, the “quorum 

sensing” (QS) category is unique to P. aeruginosa , which is known to have multiple QS systems that play key 

role s in pathogenicity and antibiotic resistance  (18) . The absence of QS iModulons in the other strains may be 

due to a lack of conditions differentially activating the associated genes . Alternatively, QS may not be regulated 

in a coordinated manner in these strains, resulting in ICA being unable to identify any associated signals. 

Additionally, the strains differed based on the iModulons capturing the highest percentage of variance in gene 

expression within each dataset (Fig. 1G -I; Supplementary Note S6). While stress response iModulons capture a 

high percentage of variance in all three strains, the associated regulators vary . iModulons enriched for RpoS, 

which governs the general stress response, capture the highest percentage of variance within the P. aeruginosa 

and P. putida datasets. However, the primary stress response iModulon in P. syringae is enriched for AlgU, 

which plays a larger role in stress tolerance in the strain compar ed to RpoS (19) . These differences suggest that 

although stress adaptation is a major driver of transcriptional variation across the strains, the underlying 

regulatory programs have diverged. 

Together, these observations suggest that cross -strain iModulon comparison can reveal conserved and diverged 

re gulatory mechanisms across the strains. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 1. Overview of iModulons of three Pseudomonas strains. (A) Scatter plots of first two principal components of 

the RNA -seq compendiums for each strain. Colored sample points represent new samples generated for the present study. 

Samples from select projects have been highlighted and labelled by project name. ( n: number of RNA -seq samples in 

dataset) (B) Data processing pipeline used to run ICA to generate iModulons. This diagram was adapted from Anand et 

al (20) . (C) ICA decomposes the gene expression profiles into an “ M” matrix containing the weights of each gene in the 

iModulons identified and an “ A” matrix containing the activity of each iModulon across all conditions (iM: iModulon). (D -F) 

Pie charts represent iModulon counts per functional category for each strain. (G -I) Bar graphs show the percentage of 

variance explained by the top five iModulons with the highest explained variance for each strain. (BGC: biosynthetic gene 

cluster) 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Cross -strain iModulon mapping identifies conserved and strain -specific 

# regulatory modules 

To compare iModulons across the pseudomonads, we first used OrthoFinder to identify orthologous gene 

groups (21) . Of 4,556 orthogroups identified, 2,063 have at least one gene member belonging to an iModulon 

(Supplementary Table S7; Supplementary Fig. S2; Supplementary Note S7). We mapped iModulons across the 

strains based on the absolute correlation (Pearson’s r) of M matrix gene weights of orthologous genes (see 

Methods) to generate an iModulon network map (Fig. 2A; Supplementary Table S8). We observed that 52% 

(56/107), 63% (52/82), and 68% (41/60) of iModulons in P. aeruginosa , P. putida , and P. syringae , respectively, 

are connected to at least one iModulon in another strain based on orthologous gene weights (Pearson’s r<0.3) .

Of these , 14% (15/107), 17% (14/82), and 15% (9/60) of iModulons in P. aeruginosa , P. putida , and P. syringae 

had a Jaccard similarity of at least 0.5 with at least one iModulon in another strain , represent ing transcriptional 

signals involv ing the expression of a core set of orthologous genes across the strains. Correlated iModulons with 

high similarity in orthologous gene membership often represent essential cellular functions, such as translation. 

In contrast , those with low similarity represent evolved functions with notable differences in gene membership 

due to lineage -specific adaptations, such as stress responses. 

Mapping iModulons across strains also highlights strain -specific regulatory mechanisms, represented by 

iModulons that fail to match to at least one iModulon from another strain (Fig. 2B). While the detection of unique 

iModulons may be due to condition space differences (Supplementary Note S8), iModulons that represent t rue 

unique capabilities of strains were identified. These iModulons often contain genes with no known orthologs 

within the other strains. For instance, P. aeruginosa con ta ins unique iModulons involved in antibiotic resistance 

and O -antigen biosynthesis which contribute to its virulence and pathogenicity. Additionally, P. putida contains 

unmapped iModulons that correspond to aromatic compound metabolism , represent ing the persistence of the 

strain against toxic substances in its natural environment. Finally, several unique iModulons of P. syringae can 

be linked to plant pathogenicity, such as type III secretion system (T3SS) generation . Overall, the iModulon 

network map serves as a basis for cross -strain TRN comparison .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2. Network map of iModulons. (A) Network map of iModulons categorized based on dominant functional category. 

(B) Pie charts of unmapped iModulons across the three strains categorized based on iModulon function (IS: insertion 

sequence; BGC: biosynthetic gene cluster). (PA: P. aerugino sa, PP: P. putida, PS: P. syringae) 

# iModulon s reveal differences in activation of translation 

iModulons representing fundamental cellular functions across the strains often share a large core orthologous 

gene set. Nevertheless , these iModulons may have different activation states in similar conditions. We studied 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint a cluster of translation -associated iModulons with high orthologous gene membership similarity, containing the 

Translational -1 (P. aeruginosa ), Translation (P. putida ), and Translation -1 (P. syringae) iModulon s. Despite 

shar ing 27 orthologous genes encoding ribosomal proteins ( Supplementary Fig. S3; Supplementary Note S9), 

their activities differ within the shared condition space (Fig. 3A). For instance, P. aeruginosa and P. putida 

strongly upregulate the ir t ranslation iModulons in CAMHB media compared to M9 media. Additionally, they 

downregulate these iModulons during treatment with the cell wall active antibiotic , ceftazidime. These activities 

reflect the expected pattern of the fear -greed trade -off: faster growth in rich media, and retardation of growth in 

stressful conditions (22) . In contrast, t he Translation -1 iModulon of P. syringae displayed a lack of increased 

growth in CAMHB media. Additionally, treatment with ceftazidime strong ly upregulat ed the iModulon. Being a 

phyto pathogen, encountering a stressor is often a n indicat or of the activation of the plant immune system to P. 

syringae . As a response, the bacteria increases translation of T3SS effectors that suppress the immune system, 

as seen with the coordinated upregulation of the T3SS -1 iModulon (Fig. 3B). Thus, the upregulation of the 

Translation -1 iModulon in this stress condition may be a result of divergent adaptations influenced by host -related 

pressures. 

These results highlight that strong conservation of iModulon gene membership does not necessarily translate to 

conserved activation states, reflecting divergence in regulatory responses across strains. We also performed a 

broader analysis of iModulon activities across the strains, details of which can be found in Supplementary Not e

S10 (Supplementary Fig. S 4-5). 

Figure 3. Cross -strain iModulon comparison based on iModulon gene membership and activities. (A) Activity of 

translation -associated iModulons across common conditions in the new RNA -seq data generated in this study (TE: trace 

element solution). (B) Scatter plot of the activities of the T3SS -1 and Translation -1 iModulons. (C) General pyoverdine 

production and uptake pathways in pseudomonads. The pathway is colored based on P. aeruginosa iModulon membership 

of genes encoding pathway components (OM: outer membrane; IM: inner membrane) (Created using Biorender) (23, 24) .

(D) Upset plot of orthogroup membership of pyoverdine -associated iModulons. Orthogroup counts include unique genes 

not assigned to any orthogroup. (PA: P. aeruginosa; PP: P. putida; PS: P. syringae; iM: iModulon; OG: orthogroup) 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# P. aeruginosa uniquely regulates pyoverdine biosynthesis independently 

# from pyoverdine uptake 

Next, we analyzed iModulons involved in pyoverdine -mediated iron acquisition (25) . In iron -limiting conditions, 

Pseudomonas strains produce a fluorescent siderophore called pyoverdine which chelates iron (Fig. 3C) (23) .

The newly formed ferri -pyoverdine complex is then taken up by the cell and reduced to a usable form. Pyoverdine 

biosynthesis and uptake are regulated by PvdS and FpvR, respectively. P. aeruginosa contains two iModulons 

individually enriched for the regulon s of each regulator, namely the PvdS and FpvR iModulons. In contrast , P. 

putida and P. syringae both have a single iModulon representing both pyoverdine biosynthesis and uptake ( P. 

putida : PvdS iModulon; P. syringae : Pyoverdine iModulon). 

To understand the unique split of the PvdS and FpvR regulated genes into two individual iModulons in P. 

aeruginosa , we compared the activities of the iModulons across the dataset (Supplementary Fig. S 6). Indirect 

regulatory mechanisms linked to virulence as well as differences in spatial structures of bacterial growth modes 

(i.e., biofilm, planktonic, and dispersed cell growth) contribute to divergence in the activities of the otherwise 

strongly correlated iModulons (Pearson’s r=0.71) (Supplementary Note S11). The extraction of individual PvdS 

and FpvR iModulons in P. aeruginosa may be linked to the pathogenicity of the strain and its consequent 

versatility. Alternatively, this may be a regulatory strategy employed to enable recycling of internalized 

pyoverdine, thereby reducing the energetic cost of pyoverdine biosynthesis (26) .

We also compared gene membership of the pyoverdine biosynthesis and uptake iModulons across strains (Fig. 

3D) . M ost genes in the pyoverdine iModulons of P. putida and P. syringae have orthologs in either the PvdS or 

FpvR iModulons of P. aeruginosa . However, some genes are unique to the iModulons of the two strains. For 

instance, seven orthologous genes are shared by the pyoverdine iModulons of P. putida and P. syringae , but 

absent in those of P. aeruginosa . These include oxidative stress mitigation genes sodA and fumC , indicating a 

coupling of oxidative stress and iron limitation responses in the strains. Together, iModulon structures and gene 

membership patterns underscore both the shared and lineage -specific adaptations in pyoverdine regulation. 

# Motility iModulons reveal varying needs across bacterial lifestyles 

A cellular function common among pseudomonads is flagella -mediated motility (28) . Each of the three strains 

possesses a primary flagellar assembly iModulon: FleN (P. aeruginosa ), FleQ -2 (P. putida ), and Flagella -1 (P. 

syringae ) iModulons (Supplementary Fig. S 7). P. syringae contains a second flagellar assembly iModulon, 

Flagella -2, which is hypothesized to enable evasion of the plant immune system (14) . We found a conserved set 

of orthologous genes in the primary flagellar assembly iModulons , m ost of which encode structural components 

of the flagella ( 5A-B; Supplementary Fig. S 8; Supplementary Note S12 ). 

While the gene neighborhoods harboring these genes are highly conserved , some iModulon genes within these 

regions are unique to individual strains. The FleN iModulon of P. aeruginosa contains a glycosylation island 

formed by three unique genes, PA1088 -PA1090 (Fig. 4A) (29, 30) . This BGC is involved in glycan biosynthesis 

and is linked to virulence and host cell -specific interactions. We also found u nique iModulon genes linked to 

flagellar arrangements. Of the three strains , P. putida possesses the highest number of flagella (31) . A unique 

gene within the FleQ -2 iModulon, PP_4331, is predicted to influence flagellation patterns (34)  (Fig. 4B). 

Additionally, while the fleN gene involved in flagellar numerical control is found in all three strains, it is not an 

iModulon member in P. putida . This may indicate a lower restriction on transcriptional control of flagellar count, 

allowing the strain to produce more flagella and move through viscous soil environments it typically inhabits. 

Overall, these findings suggest that unique iModulon genes may represent key drivers of strain -specific 

phenotypes despite overall conservation of the genomic regio ns. 

We also identified differences in motility iModulon activities under common condition s (Fig. 4 C-E). P. syringae 

strongly downregulates both flagellar assembly and chemotaxis in the presence of ceftazidime, whereas P. 

putida and P. aeruginosa upregulate both functions. Additionally, P. aeruginosa and P. syringae have stronger 

responses to oxidative stress and metal ion stress, respectively, in comparison to the other strains. Interestingly, 

the motility iModulons of P. putida have a very narrow positive activity range (Fig. 4 D). This may be attributed to 

the existence of the strain in homogeneous environments where swimming away from stressors is most often 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

not beneficial. Further analysis of iModulon activities may thus reveal similarities or differences in the “flight” 

component of stress responses across the strains that can be linked to strain -specific biology. 

Figure 4. Motility iModulons of Pseudomonas strains. (A,B ) Comparison of gene maps for two neighborhoods harboring 

most gene members of the primary flagella -assembly iModulons of the three strains (P. aeruginosa: FleN iModulon; P. 

putida: FleQ -2 iModulon; P. syringae: Flagella -1 iModulon). Gene members of these iModulons are in bold colors, and 

orthologs unique to one or two of these iModulons across all three strains are highlighted in red. Genes found in the Flagell a-

2 iModulon of P. syringae are marked with an asterisk. (C -E) Heatmaps of activities of motility iModulons in the conditions 

newly generated in this study. (TE: trace element solution; multiple carbon sources: mixture of succinate, fructose, and 

toluene) 

# iModulon activities uncover varying antibiotic stress mitigation mechanisms 

# across strains 

Another feature of interest of Pseudomonas species is antibiotic resistance  (35) . Using iModulons, we studied 

transcriptome -wide response s to ceftazidime treatment (Fig. 5A -C). Multiple carbon and amino acid metabolism -

associated iModulons were differentially a ctivated in the ceftazidime treatment condition in P. aeruginosa and P. 

putida , although they largely represent different metabolic functions in each strain. Additionally , only P. syringae 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

was observed to differentially upregulate all translation -associated iModulons during ceftazidime treatment . As 

previously suggested, this may be a host interaction -based adaptation. 

The antibiotic stress responses of P. putida and P. syringae are global and non -specific. Upon antibiotic 

treatment, both strains activated non -specific stress response iModulons such as chaperone -associated 

iModulons. However, iModulon activations in P. aeruginosa revealed specialized response components. The 

only stress response iModulon that was differentially activated in the strain was the AmpR iModulon , containing 

the beta -lactamase gene ampC . Additionally, the most strongly differentially activated iModulon was the Cell 

Division iModulon, involved in cell wall bio synthesis. Both the AmpR and Cell Division iModulons are unique to 

P. aeruginosa , revealing the unique antibiotic resistance capabilities of the strain. 

Figure 5. Antibiotic stress responses of Pseudomonas strains. (A -C) Differential iModulon activation plots for the three 

strains, comparing growth in CAMHB media to growth in CAMHB media treated with ceftazidime. (D) Heatmap depicting 

the number of orthologous genes across the three strains for select genes within antibiotic responsive iModulo ns of P. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

aeruginosa (12) . All efflux pump genes within the selected iModulons are depicted. Activating conditions for each selected 

iModulon are listed in brackets. The iModulon membership of orthologs of selected genes is highlighted in the colored boxed 

regions, and is indicative of the iModulon membership of at least one of the identified orthologs. 

# Abundance of antibiotic -responsive iModulons contribute to antibiotic 

# resistance in P. aeruginosa 

To further explore the distinctive antibiotic resistance capabilities of P. aeruginosa , we studied previously 

identified antibiotic -responsive iModulons (12) . The AmpR iModulon in P. aeruginosa contains four genes (ampC ,

creD , PA4111, and PA0466) and is involved in beta -lactam resistance (Supplementary Fig. S 9A) (37) . While 

orthologs for ampC and PA4111 exist in P. putida and P. syringae , creD and PA0466 lack orthologs in these 

strains. Additionally , while the expression of the AmpR iModulon genes showcase strong positive correlation 

with one another across the P. aeruginosa dataset, the expression of ampC and PA4111 orthologs in P. putida 

and P. syringae display low correlation with one another (Supplementary Fig. S 9B-D). This indicates a lack of 

coexpression of these orthologs across their respective datasets, resulting in the absence of an AmpR -

associated iModulon. 

Bacteria also utilize efflux pumps to resist toxic compounds. P. aeruginosa possesses four iModulons containing 

genes encoding efflux pumps previously found to be antibiotic -responsive: CpxR ( muxABC ), MexZ ( mexXY ), 

SoxR ( mexGHI -opmD ), and EsrC ( mexCD -oprJ ) iModulons (12) . Efflux pump genes in these iModulons contain 

at least one ortholog in P. putida (Fig. 5D). Several of these orthologs in P. putida are iModulon members, and 

at least one ortholog for the selected genes in the MexZ and EsrC iModulons are members of the IonicLiquid 

iModulon. This iModulon is strongly responsive to triethylammonium hydrogen sulfate. Future studies may reveal 

its responsiveness to antibiotics such as those activat ing the MexZ and EsrC iModulons of P. aeruginosa . In 

contrast to P. putida , a few of the selected genes lack orthologs in P. syring ae. Of the genes with orthologs in 

the strain, only one was a n iModulon member . Since the condition space of P. syringae mostly consists of plant 

infection and co -culture conditions , it is possible that these efflux pumps are not activated in this dataset. With 

the antibiotic treatment conditions within the P. aeruginosa dataset as reference, expansion of the P. putida and 

P. syringae datasets may reveal specific antibiotic resistance mechanisms and contribute to a more 

comprehensive iModulon coverage of efflux pumps. Alternatively, these conditions may elicit responses that are 

aligned with the previously identified general stress response patterns observed during ceftazidime treatment. 

# Discussion 

In this study, we present a genome -scale comparison of the TRNs of P. aeruginosa PAO1, P. putida KT2440 ,

and P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000 . After expanding strain -specific RNA -seq datasets with eight common 

growth conditions, we applied ICA to each dataset to extract 107, 82, and 60 iModulons for P. aeruginosa , P. 

putida , and P. syringae , respectively. Mapping iModulons across the strains based on orthologous gene 

membership reveal s shared and unique regulatory modalities. Comparative analysis of iModulon gene 

membership and activities provides insight into the diversification of TRNs . We find that conserved cellular 

functions, including translation and pyoverdine biosynthesis/uptake, can undergo strain -specific regulatory 

adaptations through both differences in iModulon gene membership and condition -specific activation patterns. 

Addition ally, analysis of motility -associated iModulons reveals how transcriptional regulation of conserved 

processes reflects differences in bacterial lifestyles, including environmental adaptation, virulence, and host -

associated behaviors. Finally, genome -level comparisons of antibiotic -responsive iModulons uncover divergent 

antibiotic stress response strategies across the strains and highlight the enrichment of specialized virulence -

associated functions in P. aeruginosa .

As an advancement over previous iModulon studies focused primarily on individual strains, this study establishes 

a scalable framework for comparing TRNs across closely related strains. We first expanded the existing strain -

specific transcriptomic datasets by incorporating shared growth conditions. This common experimental 

framework allows us to compare both TRN structure and regulator activity under common conditions. The 

improved comparability across the datasets provides new opportunities to investigate strain -specific regulatory 

strategies. A major finding of this study is that conservation of iModulon structure does not imply conservation of 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

regulatory dynamics. Our analysis suggests that even essential cellular processes like translation can be rewired 

to support different lifestyles of bacteria. This highlights the importance of comparing both iModulon composition 

and activity across strains . Furthermore, this framework enables systematic comparisons of global transcriptome 

compositions across strains exposed to the same environmental pressures. We identified differences in the 

extent to which motility is employed as a stress response among the three pseudomona ds, and demonstrated 

the utility of this method in enabling a comprehensive genome -scale comparison of stress response 

mechanisms. These case studies illustrate the breadth of biological insights that can be gained through cross -

strain iModulon analysis. 

The iModulon structure of a strain provides a modularized representation of the TRN that allows it to adapt to 

the condition space of the dataset used to compute iModulons. While transcriptional signals like translation are 

captured by ICA with a minimally diverse condition space, the comprehensiveness of the iModulons obtained 

depend on the conditions within the dataset. As a result, the comprehensiveness of cross -strain iModulon 

comparison is improved by increasing the similarity between the condition spaces of the datasets being 

analyzed. This enables the capturing of transcriptional responses of each strain to a more similar set of activating 

conditions. In this study, we provi de a first step towards building datasets for P. aeruginosa , P. putida , and P. 

syringae with greater condition space comparability through the addition of eight new overlapping conditions. 

With the new set of conditions, along with a few others that roughly compare, we show how condition -specific 

responses can be compared through cross -strai n iModulon analysis. Given the scalability of iModulon 

computation, future studies can further expand on our analysis through sample generation to improve the 

condition space overlap (Supplementary Note S8). 

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the utility of iModulons in comparing the TRNs of strains at the genome 

scale. By comparing iModulons across Pseudomonas strains, we can trace the evolutionary dynamics along 

their lineages. Altogether, this study provides a roadmap for cross -strain iModulon analysis. 

# Methods 

# RNA extraction and library preparation 

The following strains were used in this study: P. aeruginosa PAO1, P. putida KT2440, and P. syringae pv. tomato 

DC3000. Cells were grown overnight at 30 °C with shaking in 4 mL of the base medium indicated in 

Supplementary Tables S1 -3. The following day, fresh cultures were inoculated in duplicate to an initial OD 600 of 

0.05. For iron starvation (2,2' dipyridyl treatment) and nitrogen starvation (nitrogen -free M9 media with addition 

of eighteen amino acids, except for cysteine and methionine) conditions, cultures were grown in medium 

supplemented as specified in Supplementary Tables S1 -3. Cultures were harvested at mid -log phase (OD ₆₀₀ ≈

0.5) and 3 mL of culture was immediately mixed with 6 mL of RNAprotect reagent for the following conditions: 

growth in M9 glucose media (with and without trace element solution), CAMHB media, mixed carbon source 

(succinate, fructose, and toluene treatment), iron starvation, and nitrogen starvation. For ceftazidime treatment 

conditions, ceftazidime (¼ of minimum inhibitory concentration) was added at OD ₆₀₀ ≈ 0.2, and cultures were 

incubated for 1 h prior to collection. For osmotic stress (NaCl treatment), oxidative stress (H 2O2 treatment), and 

metal ion stress (CuSO 4 and ZnSO 4 treatment) conditions, cultures were grown to OD ₆₀₀ ≈ 0.5 before addition 

of the corresponding supplement to the final concentration indicated in Supplementary Table S1 -3. This was 

followed by incubation for an additional 30 min (osmotic and oxidative str ess conditions) or 1 h (metal ion stress 

conditions) before mixing 3 mL of culture with 6 mL of RNAprotect reagent. Cells were pelleted and stored at 

−80 °C until RNA extraction and RNA -seq library preparation. 

Total RNA was isolated and prepared from cell pellets using reagents from Zymo Research and silica -coated 

magnetic beads (Luna Nanotech). Cell pellets were resuspended in 415 uL RNA Binding Buffer (Zymo Research) 

containing 8 uL Beta -mercaptoethanol in 1.5 mL tubes. After dislodging pellets into the buffer using an inoculating 

loop, they were poured into 2 mL tubes containing ~250 uL 0.1mm diameter zirconia/silica beads (BioSpec 

Products). Any remaining buffer was transferred by pipetting. Cells were lysed using an Omni International Bead 

Ruptor 12 instrument (2 cycles, 1 min each at maximum speed of 6 m/s) with a 1 min centrifugation at 10,000 x 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

g between cycles. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (2 min , 10,000 x g ). A total of 200 uL of the cleared 

lysates were transferred to tubes containing 400 uL 50% ethanol and 20 uL silica -coated beads . Samples were 

vortexed and incubated at room temperature for 2 min and placed on a magnetic rack until supernatants were 

clear, after which they were aspirated. Beads were washed once with RNA Wash Buffer (Zymo Research) and 

resuspended in DNaseI master mi x (Zymo Research DNA digestion buffer plus Zymo Research DNaseI). After 

15 min incubation at room temperature, each sample was vortexed with 400 uL RNA Prep Buffer (Zymo 

Research). Samples were returned to the magnetic rack, after which they were washed twice with RNA Wash 

Buffer and eluted in 15 uL 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5. RNA c oncentrations and quality were assessed using an Agilent 

TapeStation and Nanodrop, respectively. 

For each sample, 1 ug was used for the standard RiboRid procedure (38) . RNA -seq libraries were prepared from 

5 uL of the rRNA -subtracted RNA using KAPA RNA HyperPrep Kit (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s 

protocol with volumes reduced by half. The final PCR amplification step was modified by incorporating SYBR 

and using a qPCR instrument. Samples were removed from the thermal cycler just before entering the plate au 

phase of amplification to avoid biases being potentially introduced by reagent depletion. The quality and 

concentrations of the libraries were checked with an Agilent TapeStation and Qubit instrument, respectively. 

Pooled libraries were then run on an AVITI instrument (Element Biosciences). 

# Data processing and quality control 

The iModulonMiner workflow was used to process all candidate RNA -seq samples (Supplementary Note 

S1 3)(17) . Raw read trimming was performed using Trim Galore 

(https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/ ). The reads were then assessed using 

FastQC ( https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/ ) and aligned to the reference genome 

(Accession numbers: NC_002516.2 ( P. aeruginosa PAO1); AE015451.2 ( P. putida KT2440); NC_004578.1, 

NC_004633.1, NC_004632.1 ( P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000, plasmid pDC3000A, plasmid pDC3000B, 

respectively)) using Bowtie (39) . Read direction was inferred using RSeQC (40) , and read counts were generated 

using featureCounts (41) . Finally, quality control metrics were compiled using MultiQC (42) . The final expression 

data are reported in units of log 2 transcripts per million (log 2[TPM]). 

Samples that failed the following FastQC metrics were discarded : per_base_sequence_quality, 

per_sequence_quality_scores, per_base_n_content, and adapter_content. Sample with less than 500,000 reads 

mapped to coding sequences was also discarded. Global correlations (Pearson’s r) between the gene 

expression (log 2[TPM]) of all samples within each dataset were visualized using hierarchical clustering, and 

outliers with atypical expression profiles were discarded. Samples without a biological replicate or having low 

correlation (Pearson’s r<0.95) between replicate gene expression (log 2[TPM]) were dropped. Finally, the 

log 2[TPM] data were normalized to the reference condition of each project to remove batch effects. All relevant 

files can be found on Zenodo ( https://zenodo.org/records/18931002 ). 

# Computing iModulons with ICA 

We applied ICA to each of the centered log 2[TPM] datasets by running the Scikit -learn (43)  algorithm, 

FastICA (44) , as previously described (10, 17) . Using the OptICA method (45) , the optimal dimensionality of the 

P. aeruginosa , P. putida , and P. syringae datasets were determined to be 370, 230, and 200, respectively. The 

algorithm decomposes a matrix of gene expression profiles ( X) into an iModulon matrix ( M) and activity matrix 

(A). The weights of all genes within each component extracted by ICA is provided in the M matrix, whereas the 

activity of each component across all samples in the dataset is provided in the A matrix. 

The gene weights in the M matrix specify the association of each gene with a particular iModulon, with higher 

absolute weights indicating greater association. The gene membership of an iModulon is defined by applying a 

threshold to segregate genes based on their weights in an iMod ulon. These thresholds were calculated for each 

iModulon using the D’Augustino’s K2 test for normality, as previously described (10) .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# iModulon annotation and curation 

The TRNs of all three strains were annotated using RegPrecise (46) , Pseudomonas Genome Database (47) , and 

literature. Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini -Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction was used to 

compute regulator enrichment against known regulons (FDR = 10 −5). iModulons were then named based on 

enriched regulators or functional characteristics , with further details in Supplementary Table S4 -6. 

# Cross -strain iModulon mapping 

We ran Orthofinder (21)  on default settings to identify orthologous genes. The many -to -many Orthofinder results 

were used for further steps as suggested on the Orthofinder GitHub page. If more than one gene from a single 

strain was mapped to an orthogrou p, the highest absolute gene weight was selected as the representative gene 

weight for the orthogroup within an iModulon. The M matrix for each strain was reconstructed to provide the 

weight of an orthogroup in an iModulon, using which iModulons were mapped across the strains using the 

PyModulon package (cutoff=0.3) (17) . After identifying iModulons with Pearson’s r correlation of M matrix 

orthogroup weights higher than the selected threshold, we compared iModulons based on orthologous gene 

membership similarity using the Jaccard similarity metric. 

# Differential iModulon activation 

Differential iModulon activities between conditions were calculated as previously described (10) . The statistical 

significance of the differences in the activities was determined by comparing the absolute difference in mean 

iModulon activities between the conditions and the log -normal distribution of the iModulon. iModulons with a 

threshold > 5 and F DR below the selected value were classified as differentially activated. 

# Data Availability 

All code and data (aside from raw RNA -seq files) used to generate the results in this paper can be found on 

Zenodo ( https://zenodo.org/records/18931002 ). New RNA -seq data reported in this study have bee n deposited 

in the Gene Expression Omnibus under the accession codes GSE322682, GSE322955, and GSE322719. The 

general iModulon analysis pipeline can be found at  https://zenodo.org/records/18238197 .

# Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center for support with high -performance 

computing. 

Author contributions: H.B. and B.O.P designed research. Y.H. collected the experimental data. R.S. and J. Sung 

performed RNA isolation and library construction. H.B. processed the data, performed the analysis, and wrote 

the manuscript. B.O.P. provided ment orship and guidance throughout. All participated in reviewing the 

manuscript. 

# Funding 

This work was supported by the Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF) Center for Biosustainability (CfB) at the 

Technical University of Denmark (NNF20CC0035580) and the Y.C. Fung Endowed Chair in Bioengineering at 

the University of California, San Diego. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# References 

1.  Silby MW, Winstanley C, Godfrey SAC, Levy SB, Jackson RW. 2011. Pseudomonas genomes: diverse 

and adaptable. FEMS Microbiol Rev 35:652 –680. 

2.  Lalucat J, Mulet M, Gomila M, García -Valdés E. 2020. Genomics in Bacterial Taxonomy: Impact on the 

Genus Pseudomonas. 2. Genes 11:139. 

3.  Buell CR, Joardar V, Lindeberg M, Selengut J, Paulsen IT, Gwinn ML, Dodson RJ, Deboy RT, Durkin AS, 

Kolonay JF, Madupu R, Daugherty S, Brinkac L, Beanan MJ, Haft DH, Nelson WC, Davidsen T, Zafar N, 

Zhou L, Liu J, Yuan Q, Khouri H, Fedorova N, Tran B, Russell D, Berry K, Utterback T, Van Aken SE, 

Feldblyum TV, D’Ascenzo M, Deng W -L, Ramos AR, Alfano JR, C artinhour S, Chatterjee AK, Delaney TP, 

Lazarowitz SG, Martin GB, Schneider DJ, Tang X, Bender CL, White O, Fraser CM, Collmer A. 2003. The 

complete genome sequence of the Arabidopsis and tomato pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv . tomato 

DC3000. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:10181 –10186. 

4.  Qin S, Xiao W, Zhou C, Pu Q, Deng X, Lan L, Liang H, Song X, Wu M. 2022. Pseudomonas aeruginosa: 

pathogenesis, virulence factors, antibiotic resistance, interaction with host, technology advances and 

emerging therapeutics. Signal Transduct Target Ther 7:1 –27. 

5.  Lim HG, Rychel K, Sastry AV, Bentley GJ, Mueller J, Schindel HS, Larsen PE, Laible PD, Guss AM, Niu 

W, Johnson CW, Beckham GT, Feist AM, Palsson BO. 2022. Machine -learning from Pseudomonas putida 

KT2440 transcriptomes reveals its transcriptional regulatory network. Metab Eng 72:297 –310. 

6.  Lamoureux CR, Decker KT, Sastry AV, Rychel K, Gao Y, McConn JL, Zielinski DC, Palsson BO. 2023. A 

multi -scale expression and regulation knowledge base for Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res 51:10176 –

10193. 

7.  Bajpe H, Shin J, Hefner Y, Szubin R, Sung J, Yuan Y, Palsson BO. 2026. The transcriptional regulatory 

network of the Escherichia coli MG1655 reference strain. Nucleic Acids Res 54:gkag059. 

8.  Shlens J. 2014. A Tutorial on Independent Component Analysis. arXiv:1404.2986. arXiv 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1404.2986. 

9.  Saelens W, Cannoodt R, Saeys Y. 2018. A comprehensive evaluation of module detection methods for 

gene expression data. 1. Nat Commun 9:1090. 

10.  Sastry AV, Gao Y, Szubin R, Hefner Y, Xu S, Kim D, Choudhary KS, Yang L, King ZA, Palsson BO. 2019. 

The Escherichia coli transcriptome mostly consists of independently regulated modules. Nat Commun 

10:5536. 

11.  Rychel K, Sastry AV, Palsson BO. 2020. Machine learning uncovers independently regulated modules in 

the Bacillus subtilis transcriptome. 1. Nat Commun 11:6338. 

12.  Rajput A, Tsunemoto H, Sastry AV, Szubin R, Rychel K, Chauhan SM, Pogliano J, Palsson BO. 2022. 

Advanced transcriptomic analysis reveals the role of efflux pumps and media composition in antibiotic 

responses of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Nucleic Acids Res 50:9675 –9688. 

13.  Rajput A, Tsunemoto H, Sastry AV, Szubin R, Rychel K, Sugie J, Pogliano J, Palsson BO. 2022. Machine 

learning from Pseudomonas aeruginosa transcriptomes identifies independently modulated sets of genes 

associated with known transcriptional regulators. Nucleic Acids Res 50:3658 –3672. 

14.  Bajpe H, Rychel K, Lamoureux CR, Sastry AV, Palsson BO. 2023. Machine learning uncovers the 

Pseudomonas syringae transcriptome in microbial communities and during infection. mSystems 8:e00437 -

23. 

15.  Choe D, Olson CA, Szubin R, Yang H, Sung J, Feist AM, Palsson BO. 2024. Advancing the scale of 

synthetic biology via cross -species transfer of cellular functions enabled by iModulon engraftment. Nat 

Commun 15:2356. 

16.  Jönsson M, Sigrist R, Gren T, Semenov Petrov M, Marcussen NEJ, Svetlova A, Charusanti P, Gockel P, 

Palsson BO, Yang L, Özdemir E. 2025. Machine learning uncovers the transcriptional regulatory network 

for the production host  Streptomyces albidoflavus . Cell Rep 44:115392. 

17.  Sastry AV, Yuan Y, Poudel S, Rychel K, Yoo R, Lamoureux CR, Li G, Burrows JT, Chauhan S, Haiman 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ZB, Bulushi TA, Seif Y, Palsson BO, Zielinski DC. 2024. iModulonMiner and PyModulon: Software for 

unsupervised mining of gene expression compendia. PLOS Comput Biol 20:e1012546. 

18.  Miranda SW, Asfahl KL, Dandekar AA, Greenberg EP. 2022. Pseudomonas aeruginosa Quorum Sensing, 

p. 95 –115.  In  Filloux, A, Ramos, J -L (eds.), Pseudomonas aeruginosa: Biology, Pathogenesis and Control 

Strategies. Springer International Publishing, Cham. 

19.  Yu X, Lund SP, Greenwald JW, Records AH, Scott RA, Nettleton D, Lindow SE, Gross DC, Beattie GA. 

2014. Transcriptional Analysis of the Global Regulatory Networks Active in Pseudomonas syringae during 

Leaf Colonization. mBio 5:10.1128/mbio.01683 -14. 

20.  Sastry AV, Poudel S, Rychel K, Yoo R, Lamoureux CR, Chauhan S, Haiman ZB, Bulushi TA, Seif Y, 

Palsson BO. 2021. Mining all publicly available expression data to compute dynamic microbial 

transcriptional regulatory networks. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/ 2021.07.01.450581. 

21.  Emms DM, Kelly S. 2019. OrthoFinder: phylogenetic orthology inference for comparative genomics. 

Genome Biol 20:238. 

22.  Dalldorf C, Rychel K, Szubin R, Hefner Y, Patel A, Zielinski DC, Palsson BO. 2024. The hallmarks of a 

tradeoff in transcriptomes that balances stress and growth functions. mSystems 9:e00305. 

23.  Cornelis P, Tahrioui A, Lesouhaitier O, Bouffartigues E, Feuilloley M, Baysse C, Chevalier S. 2023. High 

affinity iron uptake by pyoverdine in Pseudomonas aeruginosa involves multiple regulators besides Fur, 

PvdS, and FpvI. BioMetals 36:255 –261. 

24.  Gasser V, Guillon L, Cunrath O, Schalk IsabelleJ. 2015. Cellular organization of siderophore biosynthesis 

in  Pseudomonas aeruginosa:  Evidence for siderosomes. J Inorg Biochem 148:27 –34. 

25.  Ringel MT, Brüser T. 2018. The biosynthesis of pyoverdines. Microb Cell 5:424 –437. 

26.  Molina L, Geoffroy VA, Segura A, Udaondo Z, Ramos J -L. 2016. Iron Uptake Analysis in a Set of Clinical 

Isolates of Pseudomonas putida. Front Microbiol 7. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27.  Arvizu -Gómez JL, Hernández -Morales A, Aguilar JRP, Álvarez -Morales A. 2013. Transcriptional profile of 

P. syringae pv. phaseolicola NPS3121 at low temperature: Physiology of phytopathogenic bacteria. BMC 

Microbiol 13:81. 

28.  Bouteiller M, Dupont C, Bourigault Y, Latour X, Barbey C, Konto -Ghiorghi Y, Merieau A. 2021. 

Pseudomonas Flagella: Generalities and Specificities. Int J Mol Sci 22:3337. 

29.  Hensbergen PJ, van Huijkelom L, van Angeren J, de Ru AH, Claushuis B, van Veelen PA, Smits WK, 

Corver J. 2025. Elucidation of the Glycan Structure of the b -type Flagellin of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 

PAO1. ACS Infect Dis 11:518 –528. 

30.  Verma A, Schirm M, Arora SK, Thibault P, Logan SM, Ramphal R. 2006. Glycosylation of b -Type Flagellin 

of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: Structural and Genetic Basis. J Bacteriol 188:4395 –4403. 

31.  de Lorenzo V, Pérez -Pantoja D, Nikel PI. 2024. Pseudomonas putida KT2440: the long journey of a soil -

dweller to become a synthetic biology chassis. J Bacteriol 206:e00136 -24. 

32.  Nogales J, Vargas P, Farias GA, Olmedilla A, Sanjuán J, Gallegos M -T. 2015. FleQ Coordinates 

Flagellum -Dependent and -Independent Motilities in Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000. Appl 

Environ Microbiol 81:7533 –7545. 

33.  Kazmierczak BI, Hendrixson DR. 2013. Spatial and Numerical Regulation of Flagellar Biosynthesis in 

Polarly -Flagellated Bacteria. Mol Microbiol 88:655 –663. 

34.  Arroyo -Pérez EE, Hook JC, Alvarado A, Wimmi S, Glatter T, Thormann K, Ringgaard S. 2024. A 

conserved cell -pole determinant organizes proper polar flagellum formation. eLife 13:RP93004. 

35.  Prince A. 1986. Antibiotic resistance of  Pseudomonas  species. J Pediatr 108:830 –834. 

36.  Elfadadny A, Ragab RF, AlHarbi M, Badshah F, Ibáñez -Arancibia E, Farag A, Hendawy AO, De los Ríos -

Escalante PR, Aboubakr M, Zakai SA, Nageeb WM. 2024. Antimicrobial resistance of Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa: navigating clinical impacts, current resistance trends, and innovations in breaking therapies. 

Front Microbiol 15:1374466. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37.  Balasubramanian D, Kumari H, Mathee K. 2015. Pseudomonas aeruginosa AmpR : an acute –chronic 

switch regulator. Pathog Dis 73:1 –14. 

38.  Choe D, Szubin R, Poudel S, Sastry A, Song Y, Lee Y, Cho S, Palsson B, Cho B -K. 2021. RiboRid: A low 

cost, advanced, and ultra -efficient method to remove ribosomal RNA for bacterial transcriptomics. PLOS 

Genet 17:e1009821. 

39.  Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. 2009. Ultrafast and memory -efficient alignment of short 

DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol 10:R25. 

40.  Wang L, Wang S, Li W. 2012. RSeQC: quality control of RNA -seq experiments. Bioinforma Oxf Engl 

28:2184 –2185. 

41.  Liao Y, Smyth GK, Shi W. 2014. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning 

sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinforma Oxf Engl 30:923 –930. 

42.  Ewels P, Magnusson M, Lundin S, Käller M. 2016. MultiQC : summarize analysis results for multiple tools 

and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics 32:3047 –3048. 

43.  Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, Blondel M, Prettenhofer P, Weiss 

R, Dubourg V, Vanderplas J, Passos A, Cournapeau D, Brucher M, Perrot M, Duchesnay É. 2011. Scikit -

learn: Machine Learning in Python. J Mach Learn Res 12: 2825 –2830. 

44.  Hyvarinen A. 1999. Fast and robust fixed -point algorithms for independent component analysis. IEEE 

Trans Neural Netw 10:626 –634. 

45.  McConn JL, Lamoureux CR, Poudel S, Palsson BO, Sastry AV. 2021. Optimal dimensionality selection for 

independent component analysis of transcriptomic data. BMC Bioinformatics 22:584. 

46.  Novichkov PS, Kazakov AE, Ravcheev DA, Leyn SA, Kovaleva GY, Sutormin RA, Kazanov MD, Riehl W, 

Arkin AP, Dubchak I, Rodionov DA. 2013. RegPrecise 3.0 – A resource for genome -scale exploration of 

transcriptional regulation in bacteria. BMC Genomics 14:745. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint

47.  Winsor GL, Griffiths EJ, Lo R, Dhillon BK, Shay JA, Brinkman FSL. 2016. Enhanced annotations and 

features for comparing thousands of Pseudomonas genomes in the Pseudomonas genome database. 

Nucleic Acids Res 44:D646 –D653. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.20.739605 doi: bioRxiv preprint