Title: 49561402

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
Quantitative detection of gut microbial eukaryotes with EukDetect2 reveals global distribution of commensal protists and association with distinct microbial community structure 

Authors & affiliations 

Johnathan B. Shih 1,2 , Chunyu Zhao 3,5 , Katherine S. Pollard ,3,4,5* , Abigail L. Lind 1* 

1. School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 2. Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Quantitative Biosciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 3. Gladstone Institute of Data Science and Biotechnology, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA 4. Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA 5. Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA * correspondence: katherine.pollard@gladstone.ucsf.edu, abigail.lind@gatech.edu Keywords: metagenomics, fungi, protists, microbial eukaryotes, gut microbiome 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract 

Microbial eukaryotes are prevalent members of host-associated and free-living microbial communities, but are routinely excluded from studies of these communities. Existing methods for eukaryote detection from whole metagenome sequencing are limited by contamination of eukaryotic reference genomes and incomplete taxonomic coverage. Our previously published tool EukDetect addressed these challenges using a curated database of universal BUSCO marker genes, but lacked validated quantitative abundance metrics and was built from a limited number of genomes. Here we present EukDetect2, incorporating a database containing 6,948 microbial eukaryotic genomes representing 6,594 unique species, 2,339 of which are newly added since EukDetect version 1, alongside quantitative metrics for estimating absolute and relative abundance of microbial eukaryotes. Using simulated data, we demonstrate accurate abundance estimation, no false positives from bacterial or host-derived reads, and equivalent or greater sensitivity and specificity than alternative taxonomic profiling tools across a range of microbial abundances and community compositions. Applying EukDetect2 across globally distributed human gut microbiome cohorts, we find that Blastocystis spp. and Dientamoeba fragilis are the most prevalent gut eukaryotes across cohorts, while host-associated fungi are consistently less prevalent than commensal protists. Blastocystis abundance is positively associated with a gut microbial community enriched for fiber-fermenting microbes and depleted for pro-inflammatory and industrialization-associated taxa. EukDetect2 provides sensitive, accurate, and quantitative metrics for investigating microbial eukaryotes from metagenomic samples. 

Background 

Microbial eukaryotes are ubiquitous members of host-associated and environmental microbiomes, where they function as commensals, mutualists, parasites, and predators of other 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

microbes [1–3]. In the human gastrointestinal tract, protists and fungi engage in complex interactions with the host immune system and with other co-resident microbes. Examples include commensal mouse protists capable of influencing host immune responses and outcompeting gut bacteria for the same nutrient source [4], and commensal fungi such as 

Candida and Malassezia species contributing to inflammatory diseases [5,6]. Outside of host-associated microbial communities, fungi function as decomposers with essential roles in global nutrient cycling, and protists act as critical regulators through their functions as phagocytic predators of other microbes and through parasitic associations with invertebrates [1,7–9]. Understanding eukaryotic microbial diversity is therefore critical to the study of microbial communities. Despite their ecological and clinical relevance, microbial eukaryotes are frequently excluded from microbiome studies. The dominant metabarcoding strategy for characterizing host-associated microbiomes targets the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, which is present only in bacteria and archaea and cannot detect eukaryotes [10]. Eukaryote-specific amplicon approaches targeting the 18S ribosomal gene or the fungal ITS region can identify protists and fungi in dedicated studies, but often miss large groups of taxa, are limited in their taxonomic resolution, and cannot be applied retrospectively to the large body of whole metagenome shotgun sequencing (WMS) data generated by microbiome studies [11–14]. Conversely, WMS captures DNA from all organisms present in a sample, including eukaryotes. The primary technical barriers to routine eukaryote detection from WMS data are low eukaryotic abundance relative to bacteria and the extensive bacterial contamination present in eukaryotic reference genomes. Eukaryotic genome assemblies frequently contain bacterial-derived sequences, causing spurious alignment to eukaryotic genomes from WMS sequencing, and leading to systemic false positives [15–17]. In addition, host-derived reads can spuriously align to microbial eukaryotic genomes as a result of genome contamination or regions of high sequence similarity, as was recently demonstrated for tumor-associated microbiomes [18]. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We previously developed EukDetect to address these challenges [17]. Rather than aligning reads to full eukaryotic genomes, EukDetect aligns reads to a curated database of universal single-copy BUSCO marker genes from which bacterial sequences have been removed, solving the problem of bacterial contamination. However, EukDetect version 1 used a relatively limited number of genomes, relying on the NCBI taxonomy database to choose one representative genome per species. Changes in taxonomy and cryptic species diversity limit the sensitivity of this approach. Additionally, the first version of EukDetect lacked validated absolute or relative abundance metrics. Here we present EukDetect2, a substantially expanded and updated version of EukDetect that adds new functionality. The EukDetect2 database was constructed from ~14,600 microbial eukaryotic genomes, which was clustered to include 6,948 representative genomes representing 6,594 NCBI species taxonomy IDs, adding more than 2,000 new species since EukDetect version 1. To construct this database, genomes were clustered at 97% ANI, thus allowing cryptic species-level diversity to persist in the database. EukDetect2 also introduces two quantitative abundance metrics including a proxy for absolute abundance normalized by library size that enables cross-sample and cross-cohort comparisons, and a relative abundance metric expressing the proportional contribution of each detected species to the total eukaryotic fraction of the microbial community. To accommodate the dramatically expanded database and account for more closely related species, which increases off-target alignment [19], we have created a genome and species level disambiguation pipeline that corrects off-target hits and enables accurate quantification. EukDetect2 is both sensitive and specific on simulated sequencing reads from a three-member eukaryotic community, outperforming other eukaryotic classifiers in sensitivity and in detectable taxa. We characterize the global distribution of human gastrointestinal eukaryotes by applying the EukDetect2 pipeline to nine deeply-sequenced human gut metagenome cohorts spanning countries and lifestyles. We find that the gut protists Blastocystis and Dientamoeba fragilis are 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the most common gut eukaryotes globally, with Blastocystis reaching near-ubiquity in non-industrialized populations. Conversely, host-associated fungi are less prevalent than gut protists across all groups examined, while dietary fungi are more prevalent than host-associated fungi. Finally, leveraging EukDetect2’s absolute abundance quantification, we find that colonization by the gut protist Blastocystis is correlated with a distinct microbial community composition marked by increases in fiber-fermenting bacteria and decreases in mucin-degrading and pro-inflammatory taxa. 

Methods Constructing the EukDetect2 database 

To construct the EukDetect2 database,14,606 microbial eukaryotic genomes representing 7,944 unique species taxonomy IDs (taxIDs) were downloaded in November 2025. The majority of these genomes were downloaded from GenBank. In addition to the GenBank genomes, we used 76 genomes from the EukProt database [20] representing species without sequenced genomes in the NCBI database, and a re-assembled and filtered Dientamoeba fragilis transcriptome (see methods section “ Dientamoeba fragilis transcriptome re-assembly”). To determine average nucleotide identity (ANI) cluster cutoffs for microbial eukaryotes, all versus all ANI comparisons were performed using skani version 0.3.1 [21]. Clusters of 97% ANI were constructed using galah version 0.4.2 [22]. This resulted in 5,959 clusters of fungal genomes and 1,010 clusters of protist genomes. One representative genome was chosen from each cluster for a total of 6,969 genomes. The Dientamoeba fragilis transcriptome was not included in ANI clustering. To determine marker genes in all genomes, marker genes were identified using BUSCO version 6.0.0 using the eukaryota_odb12 database and metaeuk as a gene predictor [23,24]. After running BUSCO, 21 genomes were removed for containing less than 10 BUSCOs. To 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

determine BUSCO genes whose models may result in bacterial sequence contamination, the same BUSCO pipeline was applied to 971 bacterial genomes from the Culturable Genome Reference [25]. We identified 15 BUSCO genes that had calls in these genomes. These BUSCO marker genes were removed from all genomes before the database was compiled. Genomic regions of BUSCO marker genes were extracted from eukaryotic genomes. These sequences were clustered at a 99% identity threshold using mmseqs2 [26]. Collapsed BUSCO sequences were designed “SSCollapse” if they combined gene duplicates within a single representative genome, “SPCollapse” if they combined genes across multiple species of representative genomes, and “MGCollapse” if they combined genes across multiple genera. To mask repetitive sequence and reduce off-target read alignment, the resulting clustered sequence database was masked with RepeatMasker version 4.1.7 using the FamDB database and the options -qq -noint -norna [27,28]. The final version of the EukDetect2 database after filtering was 6,948 representative genomes, 5,959 of which were fungal (corresponding to 5,663 species taxIDs) and 989 of which were protistan (corresponding to 932 species taxIDs) (Table S1, S2). 

EukDetect2 alignment and post-processing algorithm 

To estimate absolute and relative abundances of eukaryotes from metagenomes, sequencing reads are aligned to the EukDetect2 marker database using bowtie2 with parameters optimized for sensitive detection of metagenomes (--end-to-end --very-sensitive, -X 1000) and filtered at a mapping quality also optimized for sensitivity (MAPQ > 10) [19]. To reduce off-target read alignment, reads are only retained if their total aligned length exceeds 80% of the read length, or a minimum of 60 base pairs. Low-complexity reads are filtered by computing the number of unique 4-mers divided by sequence length per read, discarding those below a threshold of 0.5. For paired-end data, a pair is discarded if either mate fails the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

complexity filter. Duplicate reads are also removed. After alignment and alignment filtering, for each reference marker sequence with one or more mapped reads, EukDetect2 computes read count, coverage, and percent identity using the pysam Python module. 

Taxonomic assignment and disambiguation 

Disambiguation is performed both at the genome level, as multiple genomes are assigned to single species taxonomy IDs, and also at the species level. Genome-level disambiguation is performed for species represented by multiple reference genomes in the database. The genome with the greatest number of mapped reads and covered bases is designated the primary genome (or genomes, in the case of ties). Each remaining genome is evaluated as potentially secondary, or representing cross-mapping from the primary, by comparing the overall percent identity between the reads mapping to each genome. If a non-primary genome’s overall percent identity is less than or equal to the primary genome’s, it is classified as a secondary hit. For genomes with fewer than five detected marker genes, a single overlapping BUSCO marker with worse or equal percent identity to the primary is sufficient for being classified as secondary. If the same BUSCO ortholog is present in the primary genome, read counts are then added to the existing primary marker entry. Otherwise, a new marker entry is created for the primary genome, with read count transferring to the primary genome and the read length of the marker in the secondary genome being added to the total marker length of the species. This prevents off-target alignment due to incomplete genomes or incomplete BUSCO annotations. Species-level disambiguation applies the same logic across all species within a genus. If reads map to multiple species in the same genus, then species with the most reads and covered bases are considered primary. Remaining species are evaluated as possible secondary hits using the same comparisons as for genome-based secondary hits. This step addresses cross-mapping between closely related species. After both rounds of reassignment, a taxon 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

must have reads mapping to at least two distinct marker genes and at least four total reads to be aligned to those genes. 

Relative and absolute abundance estimation of eukaryotes 

Absolute abundance is estimated as RPKS (Reads per Kilobase of marker Sequence) and reported as a between-sample comparative metric after normalization for library size, RPKSB (Reads Per Kilobase of marker Sequence per Billion bases sequenced). RPKS is computed as the total reads assigned to a taxon after disambiguation divided by the total length of marker sequences from the primary genome (including any marker sequences that were reassigned during the disambiguation process). Relative abundance (RelEuk) is then computed as each species RPKS divided by the sum of RPKS values detected across all species. RPKS is only reported at the species level. 

Dientamoeba fragilis transcriptome re-assembly 

A transcriptome of Dientamoeba fragilis grown in culture with multiple bacterial species was previously published in 2015 and assembled into 6,595 transcripts [29]. As this is a much lower number of genes than other parabasalid genomes and likely represents an underestimate of the D. fragilis transcriptome, we re-assembled the RNA-seq reads and removed likely bacterial sequences. First, RNA-seq reads were downloaded from the SRA under accession SRR2039085 and assembled using Trinity version 2.15.1 [30]. Protein-coding regions were identified using TransDecoder version 5.7.1, resulting in 38,220 protein-coding regions sequences (https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder). To identify and remove sequences that may have originated from bacteria in the xenic culture with Dientamoeba fragilis ,we scanned the predicted proteins with the alien index as previously described [31]. Briefly, all proteins (translated CDS regions) were aligned against the clustered NR database using 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

diamond version 2.1.9.163, resulting in 28,586 proteins with a significant hit. The alien index was calculated as 𝐴𝐼 = 𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑂 /𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑆 − 𝑏𝑏𝑠𝐼 /𝑏𝑏𝑠𝑆 , where bbsO is the bit score of the best hit to a species outside of the group lineage, bbsI is the bit score of the best hit to a species within the group lineage (skipping self hits), and bbsS is the bit score of the query aligned to itself. The recipient lineage was designated as eukaryotes. Genes with an alien index below 0.1 were considered likely eukaryotic in origin and retained. While this likely excludes genes that are truly present in D. fragilis genome, this conservative approach prevents bacterial sequences from entering the EukDetect2 database. Protein-coding regions were clustered at 99% identity to remove duplicates using cd-hit-est version 4.8.1, resulting in 11,404 protein-coding regions [32]. Completeness was assessed with BUSCO version 6.0.0 and the eukaryota_odb12 dataset [23,24]. The protein dataset had 50.4% complete (40.3% single copy, 10.1% multi copy), 10.1% fragmented, and 39.5% missing. This is similar to the BUSCO result for Trichomonas vaginalis ,the best-annotated parabasalid genome, which is 46.5% complete (41.9% single copy, 4.7% multi copy), 12.4% fragmented, and 41.1% missing, suggesting that the D. fragilis proteome presented here represents the same core eukaryotic proteins as other parabasalids. 

Simulated genomic datasets 

To determine the susceptibility of the EukDetect2 pipeline to off-target read alignments, we simulated sequencing reads from 971 bacterial genomes from the Culturable Genome Reference Database [25] at 2 million reads per genome, alongside simulating reads from the the human genome (GRCh38), mouse genome (GRCm39), and the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (TAIR 10.1) at 20x genome using art-modern (https://github.com/YU-Zhejian/art_modern). These were chosen to represent common bacterial species in the gut microbiome and common hosts where host-associated microbiota are investigated. Each sample was run through the EukDetect2 pipeline, and for each test case zero microbial 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

eukaryotes were detected. All simulated microbial sequencing and microbial communities in this manuscript were simulated using art-modern (https://github.com/YU-Zhejian/art_modern). 

Public dataset analysis 

We analyzed shotgun metagenomic data from nine deeply sequenced publicly available cohorts (Table S3). Seven cohorts represent industrialized populations. Of these, five are from the PREDICT personalized nutrition program (PREDICT1, n = 1,098; PREDICT2, n = 975; PREDICT3 UK, n = 12,340; PREDICT3 US '21, n = 11,767; PREDICT3 US '22, n = 8,469), comprising healthy adults recruited in the United Kingdom and United States [33–35]. Additionally, we used a cohort of Israeli adults from a personalized nutrition study (n = 840) [36] and a Dutch cohort enriched for plant-based dietary patterns (n = 150) [37]. To capture gut microbiome compositions from non-industrialized lifestyles, we included a cohort of Hadza hunter-gatherer adults from Tanzania (n = 450) [38] and a cohort from Fiji living in an agrarian lifestyle from (n = 157) [39]. Additional cohort information is available in Table S3. 

Blastocystis -bacterial co-abundance analysis 

Statistical analyses were performed using R version 4.5.3. For each analyzed public dataset, eukaryotes were removed from the MetaPhlAn4 relative abundance matrix prior to analysis. The remaining bacterial relative abundance matrix was centered log-ratio (CLR) transformed using the R microbiome package (version 1.32.0) to control for the compositional nature of metagenomic relative abundance data. Bacterial taxon abundance was modeled using ordinary least squares linear regression as a function of log1p-transformed Blastocystis RPKSB. Two technical covariates were included in the model: Shannon diversity of the bacterial community and the total sequencing library size. Presence or absence of Dientamoeba fragilis 

was also included as a biological covariate because it is the most frequently co-detected gut 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

protist alongside Blastocystis. Within each cohort, the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied to control the false discovery rate across taxa. Joint analysis across all cohorts was done with a two-stage approach. In the first stage, replication was assessed across the three largest cohorts (PREDICT3 UK, PREDICT3 US '21, PREDICT3 US '22; total n = 32,576). A taxon was considered replicated if it reached Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted significance (adjusted p < 0.05) in all three cohorts and had a consistent direction of effect. In the second stage, effect sizes were pooled across all seven industrialized cohorts (the three replication cohorts plus PREDICT1, PREDICT2, Zeevi et al, and Shetty et al; total n = 35,634) using random-effects inverse-variance meta-analysis, with between-study variance estimated by restricted maximum likelihood (REML). For each taxon, per-cohort weights were defined as the inverse of within-cohort variance plus estimated between-study variance. The pooled estimate was computed as the weighted mean of per-cohort effect sizes, with the pooled standard error derived from the inverse of the summed weights. Two-sided p-values were computed from the resulting Z-statistics and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. To prioritize robust cross-cohort ecological associations, pooled results were further restricted to taxa detected in all industrialized cohorts that had concordant effect directions across cohorts (Table S4). To assess whether Blastocystis -associated bacterial taxa show differential prevalence across lifestyle contexts, the prevalence of each taxon in non-industrialized cohorts (Fiji agrarian, Brito_etal and Hadza, Carter_etal) was subtracted from its prevalence in industrialized cohorts (Zeevi_etal, Shetty_etal, PREDICT1, PREDICT2, PREDICT3 UK, PREDICT3 US '21, PREDICT3 US '22), yielding a per-taxon prevalence difference. This was computed separately for taxa enriched and depleted in Blastocystis -positive samples based on the pooled IVW effect direction. The distribution of these prevalence differences was compared between Blastocystis -enriched and Blastocystis -depleted taxa using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Taxa with positive 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

prevalence differences are therefore more common in non-industrialized populations; taxa with negative differences are more common in industrialized populations. 

Results Robust quantification of eukaryotes using an updated database 

To construct a curated database of marker genes, we downloaded 14,606 microbial eukaryotic genomes representing 7,944 unique species taxonomy IDs from GenBank in November 2025. An additional 76 genomes not present in GenBank from the eukaryotic genome and transcriptome database EukProt were incorporated. All-versus-all ANI comparison revealed clustering thresholds at 99.5% ANI and at 97% ANI (Figure 1A, Table S1). Genomes clustering at 99.5% identity likely reflect similar strains while genomes clustering at 97% identity likely represent a species boundary. Clustering genomes at a threshold of 97% ANI yielded 5,959 fungal and 989 protist representative genome clusters (Figure 1B, Table S2). The EukDetect2 database contains 2,339 new species not in the previous database versions, including 1,919 new fungal and 420 new protistan species (Table S1). In addition, 124 species that were previously represented by only one single genome are now represented by multiple genome clusters, reflecting within-species diversity, cryptic speciation events, or changes in taxonomic classification (Table S2). This includes known species clusters such as the Aureobasidium melanogenum and Aureobasidium pullulans species complexes, which are represented by 16 and 6 genome clusters, respectively [40]. While most ANI-collapsed genome clusters contained a single species taxonomy ID, 802 clusters had more than one species taxonomy ID (taxID). In some cases, these multi-species clusters correspond to ambiguity in the NCBI taxonomy database (i.e., unnamed species). Each multi-species cluster was manually examined to choose a representative, prioritizing named 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

species, then NCBI-designated representative genomes, then overall assembly quality. Ultimately, 545 species (470 fungi and 75 protists) were represented by a closely related species in the final database rather than by their own genome, representing ~7% of total species. These comprised closely related species such as members of species complexes in fungi (i.e., the Trichophyton rubrum and Fusarium oxysporum species complexes), as well as closely related species such as Leishmania mexicana and Leishmania amazonensis . Species collapsed into a single representative cannot be considered functionally identical. For example, 

Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus oryzae share >99% ANI yet differ in mycotoxin production [41]. However, such species cannot be distinguished from one another in low-coverage metagenomic sequencing data, which is the intended use case of the EukDetect2 pipeline. 

EukDetect2 prevents spurious calls from bacteria and eukaryotic hosts 

In many microbial ecosystems, including the human gut microbiome, eukaryotes are lower in abundance than bacteria [13]. Eukaryotic genome assemblies frequently contain bacterial regions either through artifactual contamination during assembly or due to the biological signal of horizontal gene transfer [15]. In either case, these sequences can drive false positive identification of eukaryotes in metagenomes. To determine whether the EukDetect2 database contained bacterial sequences, we simulated 2 million sequencing reads from 971 common human gut bacteria from the Culturable Genome Reference [25] and determined that none of these bacterial genomes produced off-target hits. As with other microbial quantification pipelines designed for host-associated microbiomes, EukDetect2 is designed for sequence libraries where host reads have been removed. However, recent work has demonstrated that fungal detection in metagenomic sequencing of human tissues can arise from human-derived reads [18]. To determine whether the EukDetect2 approach spuriously calls host-derived reads as microbial, we simulated reads from the human genome (GRCh38), mouse genome (GRCm39), and the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (TAIR 10.1) at 20x genome coverage and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ran the EukDetect2 pipeline on these samples. For each case, EukDetect2 does not report any eukaryotic microbial taxa as being present, suggesting that eukaryotic host cross-mapping is unlikely to contribute to EukDetect2-reported microbes. 

Accurate metrics to quantify eukaryotes in metagenomics 

To enable absolute and relative quantification of eukaryotic members of a microbiome, we developed the metrics RPKSB (Reads Per Kilobase of marker Sequence per Billion bases sequenced), a normalized absolute abundance metric that accounts for the amount of marker gene length present in the EukDetect2 database and is normalized by sequencing library size, and RelEuk, a relative abundance metric that estimates the proportional contribution of each detected eukaryotic species to the total microbial eukaryotic community. To evaluate the RelEuk metric as an estimate of relative abundance, we simulated sequencing reads from genomes of the human gut protist Blastocystis sp. subtype 1, the human-associated fungus Malassezia restricta , and the human-associated parasitic gut protist 

Giardia duodenalis at varying genome coverages. In equal coverage simulations at 0.25x and 1x genome coverage, estimated RelEuk values closely matched the expected equal proportions for all three species (Figure 2A). In simulations where one species was present at higher coverage and two species were present at lower coverage, EukDetect2 correctly assigned a higher RelEuk value to the dominant species, with observed values closely tracking expected values across all simulated conditions (Figure 2A). To evaluate RPKSB as an absolute abundance metric, we compared estimated RPKSB to the per-genome input coverage of each species across equal-coverage simulations. RPKSB scaled linearly for all three species, with observed values closely following the expected linear relationship (Figure 2B). RPKSB is a proxy for overall genome coverage of a species within a particular sequencing library. Attempting to convert this to an estimate of the number of cells of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

a particular species is complicated by the widely varying DNA content within microbial eukaryotes, driven by differences in ploidy and in nuclei per cell. 

Eukdetect2 is more sensitive and specific than other methods for detecting low-abundance protist and fungi 

Several classes of tools are used to detect eukaryotes from shotgun metagenomes, but take different approaches suited to different uses. Methods that align reads to whole eukaryotic genomes or comprehensive nucleotide databases, such as k-mer based classifier Kraken2 and the alignment-based tool CCMetagen, inherit the bacterial sequence contamination widespread in those references [42,43]. Others, such as EukRep and EukFinder, are designed to detect eukaryotic contigs from assemblies; EukRep requires assembled metagenomes and EukFinder classifies reads as eukaryotic in origin for downstream metagenomic assembly prioritization [44,45]. The methods most comparable to EukDetect2 are MetaPhlAn4 and CORRAL, which both classify eukaryotes using curated marker databases [46,47]. CORRAL aligns reads to the EukDetect version 1 database but omits mapping quality filters, instead applying Markov clustering to resolve cross-mapping. The CORRAL taxonomic coverage is therefore identical to EukDetect version 1. MetaPhlAn4 uses lineage-specific markers spanning all domains of life, and its latest database (mpa_vJan25_CHOCOPhlAnSGB_202503, June 2026) contains 489 eukaryotic species (230 fungi, 259 protists) of mixed host-associated and environmental origin. Across all simulations, EukDetect2 matched or exceeded every tool in sensitivity while producing no off-target eukaryotic calls, and recovered relative abundances closest to expectation (Figure 3, Figure S1). To assess sensitivity and specificity, we simulated sequencing reads across a range of genome coverages for three different eukaryotic species: the gut protists Blastocystis sp. subtype 3 and Entamoba dispar , and the baker’s yeast 

Saccharomyces cerevisiae . E. dispar and S. cerevisiae both have close relatives present in all 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

three databases, while Blastocystis sp. subtype 3 does not. The lowest coverage simulated was 0.003x for Blastocystis and S. cerevisiae , and 0.02x for E. dispar .At default settings, neither CORRAL nor MetaPhlAn4 matched the sensitivity of EukDetect2 or version 1 (Figure 3A). Both tools approached EukDetect2's sensitivity only when their false-positive correcting thresholds were relaxed. Specifically, CORRAL's percent-identity cutoff was lowered from 97% to 93%, and MetaPhlAn4's stat_q parameter, which controls which percentiles of marker genes to consider, was set to 0 so that all markers are considered. Both of these adjustments are noted by the authors to increase the false positive rate. We refer to these altered tool settings as CORRAL (relaxed) and MetaPhlAn4 (relaxed). EukDetect2 was more specific than all other tools tested. No tool reported off-target hits for Blastocystis subtype 3, consistent with its lack of close relatives (Figure 3B). For E. dispar ,however, MetaPhlAn4 (default and relaxed) reported the pathogen E. histolytica every time it detected any Entamoeba . EukDetect2 did not report any other eukaryote for the E. dispar 

containing samples. CORRAL reported E. histolytica in several simulations and EukDetect version 1 did so once. For S. cerevisiae , MetaPhlAn4 (relaxed) reported close relatives below 0.03x, the lowest coverage at which MetaPhlAn4 (default) detected the species at all, while CORRAL and both EukDetect versions reported none. We next evaluated absolute and relative abundance accuracy using simulated mixtures from Figure 2 and the ZymoBIOMICS mock community extracted with the ZymoBIOMICS DNA extraction kit, in which S. cerevisiae and Cryptococcus neoformans are present at equal DNA proportions [48]. MetaPhlAn4 was assessed only for relative abundance, as it does not estimate absolute abundance. On the simulated mixtures, EukDetect version 1 performed comparably to EukDetect2, with slightly larger deviations from expected values (Figure S1A,B). CORRAL, at its default 97% identity cutoff, estimated abundances poorly across the equal-coverage, 

Blastocystis -dominant, and Giardia -dominant communities (Figure S1C); at the relaxed 93% cutoff, it converged on results nearly identical to version 1 (Figure S1D). MetaPhlAn4 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

consistently underestimated Blastocystis sp. subtype 1, producing systematic relative-abundance error (Figure S1E). On the ZymoBIOMICS sequencing dataset, EukDetect2 detected both species at higher absolute abundance than version 1 (Figure S1F), with a modest gain for S. cerevisiae and a substantial one for C. neoformans. Version 1 did not detect C. neoformans and yielded 100% relative abundance for S. cerevisiae . CORRAL reproduced this version 1 result at default settings but recovered both species when relaxed (Figure S1G). For relative abundance, EukDetect2 came closest to the expected 50:50 ratio, while EukDetect version 1 and CORRAL (default) reported S. cerevisiae at 100%, and MetaPhlAn4 and CORRAL (relaxed) deviated modestly (Figure S1H). This improvement stems from changes in database construction and read filtering. Version 1 represented C. neoformans with strain JEC21, since reclassified as C. deneoformans ;this divergent strain, combined with version 1's stringent MAPQ > 30 filter, gave poor marker coverage of the ZymoBIOMICS strain. EukDetect2's ANI clustering circumvents this, increasing sensitivity and robustness to future taxonomic changes. 

EukDetect2 quantifies and identifies a geographic distribution of gut eukaryotes 

To evaluate the presence and abundance of common gut eukaryotes, metagenomic sequencing data from nine publicly available cohorts spanning industrialized and non-industrialized populations were processed through the Eukdetect2 pipeline (Figure 4). The commensal protist Blastocystis was the most prevalent eukaryote detected across all cohorts. It was near-ubiquitous in non-industrialized populations, reaching 95% prevalence in the Fijian agrarian cohort and 82% in the Hadza hunter-gatherer cohort (Figure 4A). Blastocystis 

was less prevalent in industrialized cohorts, ranging from 50% in the Dutch cohort to as low as 7% in the PREDICT3 US 2022 cohort. Prevalence was consistently lower across US cohorts than others, with the highest US prevalence observed in the PREDICT2 cohort at 12%. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Blastocystis was also frequently highly abundant when detected, with RPKSB values spanning several orders of magnitude (Figure 4B). Recent work that used a whole-genome alignment based approach to detect Blastocystis in all PREDICT cohorts alongside numerous other cohorts found similar, though slightly lower, prevalences of Blastocystis in all cohorts [49]. The gut protist Dientamoeba fragilis was also prevalent, though at lower prevalence than 

Blastocystis , and unlike Blastocystis was not substantially increased in prevalence outside of industrialized groups. Prevalence varied between non-industrialized groups; D. fragilis was present in 24% of individuals in the Fijian population and 9% of individuals in the Hadza population. Within industrialized groups, the Israeli cohort had the highest frequency at 24% prevalence. D. fragilis was least prevalent among US cohorts, at 4% or lower prevalence. Pathogenic eukaryotes, including Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia duodenalis , were rare in all cohorts examined and were below 1% prevalence in all industrialized populations. Both species were more frequently observed in non-industrialized settings. Giardia duodenalis 

was present in 8% of Hadza individuals and 1% of Fijian individuals, and E. histolytica was present in 4% of Fijian individuals and <1% of Hadza individuals. Host-associated fungi, including Candida and Malassezia species, were detected at low prevalence across all cohorts (Figure 4). In contrast, environmental and dietary fungi were more prevalent. Saccharomyces cerevisiae , associated with breads and alcoholic beverages, was detected across all cohorts at prevalence ranging from 5% to 22%. Multiple cheese-associated fungi, including Penicillium roqueforti and Geotrichum bryndzae , were prevalent in European and US industrialized cohorts, consistent with their association with cheese [50]. Fungi are difficult to lyse and can be under-represented in sequencing libraries for this reason. However, the presence of high levels of dietary fungi, including the difficult to lyse filamentous mold 

Penicillium roqueforti , suggests that lysis alone does not explain the lower prevalence of host-associated fungi in metagenomic sequencing datasets, which may instead reflect their true rarity in the gut. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Eukaryote quantification reveals association with bacterial community structures 

Multiple previously published works have established a link between Blastocystis 

carriage and an altered gut microbiome community composition [33,49,51–55]. We assessed the association of other microbes with Blastocystis sp., the most prevalent gut eukaryote, using ordinary least squares regression pooling effect sizes across all seven industrialized cohorts, accounting for cohort heterogeneity and adjusting for library size, Shannon diversity of the community, and the presence of the most commonly co-occurring protist, Dientamoeba fragilis 

(see Methods). In total, 238 microbial taxa were enriched in samples with higher Blastocystis loads and 118 microbial taxa were depleted (Table S4). Bacterial and archaeal taxa that were enriched in samples with higher Blastocystis load are consistent with a fiber-fermenting and methanogenic gut environment (Figure 5A). Blastocystis was positively associated with the presence of the methanogenic archaea Methanobrevibacter smithii and Methanosphaera stadtmanae ,hydrogen-consuming methanogens that remove H ₂ generated by primary fermenters [56,57]. Alongside these archaea, enriched taxa included keystone resistant starch and cellulose degraders ( Ruminococcus bromii and Ruminococcus champanellensis ) [58,59], primary butyrate producers (Coprococcus eutactus, Roseburia lenta, Roseburia zhanii, and 

Butyricicoccus intestinisimiae ) [60–62], and Bacteroidaceae capable of complex polysaccharide utilization ( Phocaeicola plebeius , Bacteroides pectinophilus ) [63,64]. Oxalobacter aliiformigenes ,which degrades dietary oxalate from plant foods and is depleted in industrialized populations [65,66], was also enriched. Taxa that were depleted in higher Blastocystis gut environments include groups that are enriched in non-industrialized groups and are associated with gut inflammation. This includes multiple Eggerthellaceae species that transform bile acids and dietary polyphenols, and which in the case of Eggerthella lenta have been linked to pro-inflammatory processes in the gut [67,68]. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mediterraneibacter gnavus and Ruminococcus torques , specialist mucin degraders with links to inflammatory bowel disease [69–71], were negatively associated, as were opportunistic and antibiotic-associated taxa including Clostridium innocuum and Enterocloster bolteae [72,73]. To assess whether these associations reflect a broader lifestyle signal, we compared the mean prevalence of each taxon in non-industrialized versus industrialized populations across all nine cohorts. Blastocystis-enriched taxa showed significantly higher prevalence in non-industrialized populations relative to industrialized ones, while Blastocystis-depleted taxa showed the opposite pattern (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p = 2.75 × 10 ⁻⁵⁹; Figure 5B). Taken together, these findings suggest that Blastocystis colonization is strongly associated with a gut microbial ecology characteristic of non-industrialized, fiber-rich dietary environments, marked by active plant polysaccharide fermentation, methanogenic hydrogen disposal, and the absence of taxa that expand in the context of industrialization. 

Discussion 

EukDetect2 represents a significant expansion of detectable eukaryotic species relative to EukDetect version 1, while adding validated absolute (RPKSB) and relative (RelEuk) abundance metrics. By aligning only to curated, decontaminated BUSCO markers and demonstrating in simulations that neither gut bacteria nor host (human, mouse, and Arabidopsis thaliana ) generate spurious calls, we show that this gain in sensitivity does not come at the cost of specificity. The genome- and species-level disambiguation pipeline makes accurate quantification possible despite the denser, more closely related reference set in the expanded, ANI-clustered database. This clustering also makes EukDetect2 robust to taxonomic reclassification and to the growing number of strains sequenced per species. Benchmarked against its predecessor and against MetaPhlAn4, EukDetect2 captures every species that MetaPhlAn4 detects while additionally recovering low-abundance taxa that MetaPhlAn4 misses, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and recovers expected relative abundances in mock communities with less error than MetaPhlAn4 or EukDetect version 1. Applied across nine globally distributed cohorts, EukDetect2 reveals that the commensal protists Blastocystis and Dientamoeba fragilis are the most prevalent and abundant gut eukaryotes, far exceeding host-associated fungi, while pathogenic protists like Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia duodenalis are rare and largely confined to non-industrialized populations. This joins a body of evidence from targeted assays of Blastocystis species and 

Dientamoeba fragilis in case-control and general population studies that suggests that these protists constitute normal commensal members of the gut microbiome [74–77]. This does not preclude the possibility of harmful effects in some cases, as many commensal gut bacteria can contribute to disease [78], but argues against treating these protists as primary pathogens. Host-associated fungi were consistently rare, and only exceeded 1% prevalence in the non-industrialized Hadza population. One possible explanation for the relative rarity of host-associated fungi in gut metagenomic sequencing is that fungi resist common DNA lysis procedures and are therefore under-represented [79]. However, EukDetect2 detected fungi associated with fermented foods, breads, and dairy products more frequently than host-associated fungi like Candida albicans . Further, some of the dietary fungi detected are known to be difficult to lyse via standard microbiome DNA extraction protocols. One of the prevalent food-associated fungi detected by EukDetect2 is the blue cheese fungus Penicillium roqueforti , which is a filamentous mold. High-yield DNA extraction procedures for filamentous fungi typically include lyophilization of the mycelia followed by grinding in liquid nitrogen [80]. Nevertheless, despite originating from multiple independent studies with different DNA extraction procedures, 

Penicillium roqueforti was detected in European and US cohorts at higher prevalence than any host-associated fungi. Together, these observations indicate that the low signal from host-associated fungi reflects rarity in the gut rather than extraction bias alone. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Our analysis links higher Blastocystis abundance to a gut community enriched for fiber-fermenting taxa and depleted for mucin-degrading and industrialization-associated organisms. Additionally, the taxa identified as associated with Blastocystis within industrialized cohorts track the broader industrialized–non-industrialized prevalence gradient. We emphasize that this is an association and not evidence of a causal role. Blastocystis abundance has been demonstrated to be associated with fiber-rich diets and favorable cardiometabolic markers [49]. Although restricting the meta-analysis to industrialized cohorts and adjusting for colonization by D. fragilis ,Shannon diversity, and library size mitigates the most obvious confounding factors, other unmeasured dietary or lifestyle factors could drive both Blastocystis colonization and the surrounding community structure. Further, differences in sample processing within and between these nine disparate cohorts may also drive taxonomic differences. Whether Blastocystis 

shapes the gut microbiome composition, is a marker for this composition, or both, cannot be resolved from metagenomic surveys. However, this work joins a growing body of evidence that 

Blastocystis presence is associated with an altered gut microbial community [49,51–55]. Work with Blastocystis in animal models has been relatively limited due to challenges in establishing long term colonization in mice [81,82]. However, one long-term colonization study in rats demonstrated that colonization by the protist markedly altered the rat gut bacterial community [83]. Further work is needed to determine whether Blastocystis colonization alters the gut microbiota directly. One limitation of the EukDetect2 approach is that it relies on species with available genomes or transcriptomes. Targeted approaches that amplify the 18S region can capture species with only 18S sequences available, though primary efficacy varies and entire eukaryotic groups can be missed due to poor amplification [12,84,85]. With respect to gut eukaryotic diversity, many gut protist species do not have available genome or transcriptome sequences, and therefore our estimates of gut eukaryotic diversity remain a floor, not a ceiling. This impacts detection of eukaryotes in all environments. This includes the amoebozoans Endolimax nana 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and Entamoeba coli and the metamonads Enteromonas hominis, Retortamonas intestinalis, and 

mesnili [86]. However, the taxonomic coverage of protists continues to improve, and both 

Dientamoeba fragilis and Pentatrichomonas hominis have been added to the EukDetect2 database since the first version, alongside increased Blastocystis coverage. 

Conclusions 

Together, these results establish gut protists as common and abundant members of the human gut microbiome rather than incidental or exclusively pathogenic occupants. By pairing an expanded marker database with validated abundance metrics, EukDetect2 can be applied retrospectively to a large body of shotgun data already generated for microbiome profiling across host-associated and free-living microbial communities. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by NHLBI award #HL160862, the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, and Gladstone Institutes to K.S.P., and by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) award K22AI173181-02 and Georgia Institute of Technology to A.L.L. Funders had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, or interpretation, or writing of the manuscript. 

Competing Interests 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Author Contributions 

A.L.L. and K.S.P. conceived and designed the study. J.B.S., C.Z., and A.L.L. developed the approach and analyzed the data. J.S., A.L.L., C.Z., and K.S.P. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Availability of data and materials 

All sequencing data used in this work was taken from publicly available sources. ZymoBIOMICS mock community data was downloaded from the European Nucleotide Archive under BioProject PRJEB38036. Details for the human gut metagenomic sequencing analyzed in this work, including the public bioproject numbers, is available in Table S1. The assembled 

Dientamoeba fragilis is available on Zenodo at 10.5281/zenodo.20818360. EukDetect2 is available on github (https://github.com/allind/EukDetect) and bioconda (https://anaconda.org/channels/bioconda/packages/eukdetect/overview). The EukDetect2 database is available on Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19056625. An archived version of the code used to produce the results in this work is available on Zenodo at 10.5281/zenodo.20818571. R code for statistical analysis of bacterial-protist co-abundance is available on github at https://github.com/allind/eukdetect2_analyses. 

Figure legends: Figure 1. Composition of the EukDetect2 database. ( A) Distribution of pairwise average nucleotide identity (ANI) across all-versus-all comparisons of 14,606 microbial eukaryotic genomes downloaded from GenBank. Dashed lines indicate ANI thresholds of 97% (theoretical species boundary) and 99% (theoretical strain boundary). Genomes were clustered at 97% ANI to select representative genomes for the database. (B) Taxonomic composition of the EukDetect2 representative genome database, comprising 5,959 fungal and 989 protist representative genomes. 

Figure 2. EukDetect2 accurately estimates eukaryotic community composition and abundance in simulated metagenomes. (A) Observed (filled circles) vs. expected (open 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

circles) eukaryotic relative abundance for Malassezia restricta , Blastocystis sp. subtype 1, and 

Giardia duodenalis across two equal-coverage communities at 0.25x and 1x per genome, and three communities in which one species was simulated at 1x while the others were simulated at 0.25x. (B) RPKSB (Reads per Kilobase of Sequence per Billion bases) scales linearly with per-genome coverage across equal-coverage communities (0.25x–1x). The dashed line indicates expected linear scaling, calculated as the observed median RPKSB at 0.25x scaled proportionally at each successive coverage level. 

Figure 3. Sensitivity and specificity of eukaryotic profiling tools across simulated genome coverages. Shotgun reads were simulated across a range of coverages for 

Blastocystis subtype 3, Entamoeba dispar , and Saccharomyces cerevisiae — across six replicates per coverage level. (A) Detection sensitivity, shown as the percentage of replicates in which each target species was detected by each tool. For each species, the x-axis begins at the lowest coverage at which reads were simulated. (B) Off-target detection rate, shown as the percentage of replicates returning one or more non-target eukaryote hits. Results are shown for EukDetect v1, EukDetect2, MetaPhlAn4 (default - stat_q 0.2, and relaxed - stat_q 0 thresholds), and CORRAL (default - PID 97% and relaxed - PID 93% thresholds). 

Figure 4. Prevalence and abundance of gut eukaryotes across human cohorts. (A) Prevalence of detected eukaryotic species across nine cohorts spanning industrialized and non-industrialized populations. Cell color and percentage indicate the proportion of samples in which each species was detected. Species are grouped into host-associated protists, host-associated fungi, and environmental and dietary fungi. Solid and dashed lines delineate group boundaries. Cohort sizes are shown below all eukaryotic species. Additional cohort information is in Table S1. In cases where reported cohort sizes in publications and this work differ, this reflects differences in public availability of sequence data. (B) RPKSB distribution for each species 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

across all samples in which it was detected, shown on a log scale. Box plots show median and interquartile range. Points show individual sample values. Zeros are excluded. 

Figure 5. Gut bacterial taxa associated with Blastocystis colonization across cohorts. (A) Pooled effect sizes (centered log-ratio, CLR) for bacterial taxa significantly associated with 

Blastocystis presence across cohorts. Red indicates taxa enriched in Blastocystis -positive samples; blue indicates depleted taxa. Points show the pooled estimate; bars show 95% confidence intervals. Taxa are ordered by effect size. Only named species taxa are included in this graph, excluding those known by metagenome assemblies alone. A full list of taxa is in Table S4. (B) Distribution of prevalence differences (non-industrialized minus industrialized) for all Blastocystis -enriched and Blastocystis -depleted taxa. Blastocystis -enriched taxa are significantly more prevalent in non-industrialized populations, while depleted taxa are significantly more prevalent in industrialized populations. 

Supplementary Tables and Figures 

Table S1. Species, genomes, taxonomy IDs, and sources of EukDetect2 database entries. Table S2. Genome cluster membership of 97% ANI genome clusters in the EukDetect2 database. Table S3. Public metagenome sequencing cohort information. Table S4. Table of pooled effect sizes of Blastocystis IVW analysis. 

Figure S1 . Performance of eukaryotic profiling tools on simulated metagenomic communities. (A–F) Observed (filled circles) vs. expected (open circles) eukaryotic fraction for three simulated species across five community compositions, estimated by EukDetect v2 (A), EukDetect v1 (B), MetaPhlAn4- default (--stat_q 0.2) (C), MetaPhlAn4-relaxed (--stat_q 0) (D), 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

CORRAL-default (PID cutoff 97%) (E), and CORRAL-relaxed (PID cutoff 93%) (F). Line length reflects deviation from expectation. Communities were simulated across two equal-coverage communities at 0.25x and 1x per genome, and three communities in which one species was simulated at 1x while the others were simulated at 0.25x. For EukDetect2, the eukaryotic fraction is the tool's reported RelEuk metric; for EukDetect v1, RelEuk has been calculated from the existing database; for MetaPhlAn4, it is the species-level relative abundance expressed as a percentage of total eukaryotic relative abundance; for CORRAL, it is the species-level CPM expressed as a percentage of total eukaryotic CPM. (G) RPKSB for EukDetect v2 and v1 on six biological replicates of the ZymoBIOMICS mock community extracted with the ZymoBIOMICS DNA extraction kit [48]. (H) CORRAL-CPM (default and relaxed) on the same community as (G). (I) Eukaryotic fraction across all six tool configurations; dashed line indicates the expected 50% per species. All relative abundances are calculated in the same fashion as A-F. 

References 

1. Gao Z, Karlsson I, Geisen S, Kowalchuk G, Jousset A. Protists: Puppet Masters of the Rhizosphere Microbiome. Trends in Plant Science. 2019;24:165–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2018.10.011 2. Lind A. Evolution and ecology of commensal gut protists: recent advances. Current Opinion in Genetics & Development. 2025;94:102382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2025.102382 3. Gerrick ER, Howitt MR. The Lost Kingdom: commensal protists in the gut microbiota. Trends Microbiol. 2025;33:603–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2025.01.008 4. Gerrick ER, Zlitni S, West PT, Carter MM, Mechler CM, Olm MR, et al. Metabolic diversity in commensal protists regulates intestinal immunity and trans-kingdom competition. Cell. 2024;187:62-78.e20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.11.018 5. Limon JJ, Tang J, Li D, Wolf AJ, Michelsen KS, Funari V, et al. Malassezia Is Associated with Crohn’s Disease and Exacerbates Colitis in Mouse Models. Cell Host & Microbe. 2019;25:377-388.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2019.01.007 6. Li XV, Leonardi I, Putzel GG, Semon A, Fiers WD, Kusakabe T, et al. Immune regulation by fungal strain diversity in inflammatory bowel disease. Nature. Nature Publishing Group; 2022;603:672–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04502-w 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7. Wang B, Chen D, Wang S, Wu L, Wu Y, Liu S, et al. The diversity of soil parasitic protists shapes ecosystem stability worldwide. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences; 2026;123:e2528901123. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2528901123 8. de Vargas C, Audic S, Henry N, Decelle J, Mahé F, Logares R, et al. Eukaryotic plankton diversity in the sunlit ocean. Science. American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2015;348:1261605. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261605 9. Talbot JM, Bruns TD, Taylor JW, Smith DP, Branco S, Glassman SI, et al. Endemism and functional convergence across the North American soil mycobiome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences; 2014;111:6341–6. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1402584111 10. Hernández-Santos N, Klein BS. Through the Scope Darkly: The Gut Mycobiome Comes into Focus. Cell Host & Microbe. Elsevier; 2017;22:728–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.11.013 11. Campo J del, Bass D, Keeling PJ. The eukaryome: Diversity and role of microeukaryotic organisms associated with animal hosts. Functional Ecology. 2020;34:2045–54. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.13490 12. Campo J del, Pons MJ, Herranz M, Wakeman KC, Valle J del, Vermeij MJA, et al. Validation of a universal set of primers to study animal-associated microeukaryotic communities. Environmental Microbiology. 2019;21:3855–61. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.14733 13. Parfrey LW, Walters WA, Knight R. Microbial Eukaryotes in the Human Microbiome: Ecology, Evolution, and Future Directions. Frontiers in Microbiology. 2011;2:153. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2011.00153 14. Andersen LO, Vedel Nielsen H, Stensvold CR. Waiting for the human intestinal Eukaryotome. The ISME Journal. Nature Publishing Group; 2013;7:1253–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2013.21 15. Steinegger M, Salzberg SL. Terminating contamination: large-scale search identifies more than 2,000,000 contaminated entries in GenBank. Genome Biology. 2020;21:115. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-02023-1 16. Keeling PJ, Palmer JD. Horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotic evolution. Nat Rev Genet. Nature Publishing Group; 2008;9:605–18. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2386 17. Lind AL, Pollard KS. Accurate and sensitive detection of microbial eukaryotes from whole metagenome shotgun sequencing. Microbiome. 2021;9:58. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-021-01015-y 18. Ge Y, Lu J, Puiu D, Revsine M, Salzberg SL. Comprehensive analysis of microbial content in whole-genome sequencing samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas project. Science Translational Medicine. American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2025;17:eads6335. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.ads6335 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19. Zhao C, Shi ZJ, Pollard KS. Pitfalls of genotyping microbial communities with rapidly growing genome collections. Cell Syst. 2023;14:160-176.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2022.12.007 20. Richter DJ, Berney C, Strassert JFH, Burki F, Vargas C de. EukProt: a database of genome-scale predicted proteins across the diversity of eukaryotic life. bioRxiv. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory; 2020;2020.06.30.180687. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.30.180687 21. Shaw J, Yu YW. Fast and robust metagenomic sequence comparison through sparse chaining with skani. Nat Methods. Nature Publishing Group; 2023;20:1661–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-02018-3 22. Aroney STN, Camargo AP, Tyson GW, Woodcroft BJ. Galah: More scalable dereplication for metagenome assembled genomes. Zenodo; 2024 [cited 2026 June 22]; https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13637856 23. Manni M, Berkeley MR, Seppey M, Simão FA, Zdobnov EM. BUSCO Update: Novel and Streamlined Workflows along with Broader and Deeper Phylogenetic Coverage for Scoring of Eukaryotic, Prokaryotic, and Viral Genomes. Molecular Biology and Evolution. 2021;38:4647– 54. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msab199 24. Simão FA, Waterhouse RM, Ioannidis P, Kriventseva EV, Zdobnov EM. BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics. 2015;31:3210–2. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351 25. Zou Y, Xue W, Luo G, Deng Z, Qin P, Guo R, et al. 1,520 reference genomes from cultivated human gut bacteria enable functional microbiome analyses. Nature Biotechnology. 2019;37:179–85. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-018-0008-8 26. Steinegger M, Söding J. MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for the analysis of massive data sets. Nat Biotechnol. Nature Publishing Group; 2017;35:1026–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3988 27. Smit A, Hubley R, Green P. Repeatmasker Open-4.0 [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2015 Jan 10]. http://www.repeatmasker.org. Accessed 10 Jan 2015 28. Storer J, Hubley R, Rosen J, Wheeler TJ, Smit AF. The Dfam community resource of transposable element families, sequence models, and genome annotations. Mobile DNA. 2021;12:2. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13100-020-00230-y 29. Barratt JLN, Cao M, Stark DJ, Ellis JT. The Transcriptome Sequence of Dientamoeba fragilis Offers New Biological Insights on its Metabolism, Kinome, Degradome and Potential Mechanisms of Pathogenicity. Protist. 2015;166:389–408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.protis.2015.06.002 30. Haas BJ, Papanicolaou A, Yassour M, Grabherr M, Blood PD, Bowden J, et al. De novo transcript sequence reconstruction from RNA-seq using the Trinity platform for reference generation and analysis. Nature protocols. Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved.; 2013;8:1494–512. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2013.084 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31. Lind A, McDonald NA, Gerrick ER, Bhatt AS, Pollard KS. Contiguous and complete assemblies of Blastocystis gut microbiome-associated protists reveal evolutionary diversification to host ecology [Internet]. bioRxiv; 2025 [cited 2025 Jan 16]. p. 2023.11.20.567959. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.11.20.567959 32. Fu L, Niu B, Zhu Z, Wu S, Li W. CD-HIT: accelerated for clustering the next-generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 2012;28:3150–2. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts565 33. Asnicar F, Berry SE, Valdes AM, Nguyen LH, Piccinno G, Drew DA, et al. Microbiome connections with host metabolism and habitual diet from 1,098 deeply phenotyped individuals. Nature Medicine. Nature Publishing Group; 2021;27:321–32. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-01183-8 34. Fackelmann G, Manghi P, Carlino N, Heidrich V, Piccinno G, Ricci L, et al. Gut microbiome signatures of vegan, vegetarian and omnivore diets and associated health outcomes across 21,561 individuals. Nat Microbiol. Nature Publishing Group; 2025;10:41–52. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-024-01870-z 35. Asnicar F, Manghi P, Fackelmann G, Baldanzi G, Bakker E, Ricci L, et al. Gut micro-organisms associated with health, nutrition and dietary interventions. Nature. Nature Publishing Group; 2026;650:450–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09854-7 36. Zeevi D, Korem T, Zmora N, Israeli D, Rothschild D, Weinberger A, et al. Personalized Nutrition by Prediction of Glycemic Responses. Cell. 2015;163:1079–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.001 37. Shetty SA, Stege PB, Hordijk J, Gijsbers E, Dierikx CM, van Duijkeren E, et al. Species-Specific Patterns of Gut Metabolic Modules in Dutch Individuals with Different Dietary Habits. mSphere. 2022;7:e0051222. https://doi.org/10.1128/msphere.00512-22 38. Carter MM, Olm MR, Merrill BD, Dahan D, Tripathi S, Spencer SP, et al. Ultra-deep sequencing of Hadza hunter-gatherers recovers vanishing gut microbes. Cell. 2023;186:3111-3124.e13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.05.046 39. Brito IL, Yilmaz S, Huang K, Xu L, Jupiter SD, Jenkins AP, et al. Mobile genes in the human microbiome are structured from global to individual scales. Nature. 2016;535:435–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18927 40. Di Francesco A, Zajc J, Stenberg JA. Aureobasidium spp.: Diversity, Versatility, and Agricultural Utility. Horticulturae. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute; 2023;9:59. https://doi.org/10.3390/horticulturae9010059 41. Gibbons JG, Salichos L, Slot JC, Rinker DC, McGary KL, King JG, et al. The evolutionary imprint of domestication on genome variation and function of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus oryzae. Current biology : CB. 2012;22:1403–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012.05.033 42. Marcelino VR, Clausen PTLC, Buchmann JP, Wille M, Iredell JR, Meyer W, et al. CCMetagen: comprehensive and accurate identification of eukaryotes and prokaryotes in metagenomic data. Genome Biology. 2020;21:103. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-02014-2 43. Wood DE, Lu J, Langmead B. Improved metagenomic analysis with Kraken 2. Genome Biol. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2019;20:257. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1891-0 44. Zhao D, Salas-Leiva DE, Williams SK, Dunn KA, Shao JD, Roger AJ. Eukfinder: a pipeline to retrieve microbial eukaryote genome sequences from metagenomic data. mBio. American Society for Microbiology; 2025;16:e00699-25. https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00699-25 45. West PT, Probst AJ, Grigoriev IV, Thomas BC, Banfield JF. Genome-reconstruction for eukaryotes from complex natural microbial communities. Genome Research. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2018;28:569–80. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.228429.117 46. Bazant W, Blevins AS, Crouch K, Beiting DP. Improved eukaryotic detection compatible with large-scale automated analysis of metagenomes. Microbiome. 2023;11:72. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-023-01505-1 47. Blanco-Míguez A, Beghini F, Cumbo F, McIver LJ, Thompson KN, Zolfo M, et al. Extending and improving metagenomic taxonomic profiling with uncharacterized species using MetaPhlAn 4. Nat Biotechnol. Nature Publishing Group; 2023;41:1633–44. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01688-w 48. Yang F, Sun J, Luo H, Ren H, Zhou H, Lin Y, et al. Assessment of fecal DNA extraction protocols for metagenomic studies. Gigascience. 2020;9:giaa071. https://doi.org/10.1093/gigascience/giaa071 49. Piperni E, Nguyen LH, Manghi P, Kim H, Pasolli E, Andreu-Sánchez S, et al. Intestinal Blastocystis is linked to healthier diets and more favorable cardiometabolic outcomes in 56,989 individuals from 32 countries. Cell. Elsevier; 2024;187:4554-4570.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.018 50. Sulo P, Laurencík M, Poláková S, Minárik G, Sláviková E. Geotrichum bryndzae sp. nov., a novel asexual arthroconidial yeast species related to the genus Galactomyces. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2009;59:2370–4. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.008938-0 51. Beghini F, Pasolli E, Truong TD, Putignani L, Cacciò SM, Segata N. Large-scale comparative metagenomics of Blastocystis, a common member of the human gut microbiome. ISME J. Nature Publishing Group; 2017;11:2848–63. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2017.139 52. Belkessa S, Pasolli E, Medrouh B, Berg RPKD, Andersen LO ’Brien, Nielsen HV, et al. Structure analysis of human gut microbiota associated with single-celled gut protists using Next-Generation Sequencing of 16S and 18S rRNA genes. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2025;27:2955–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2025.06.006 53. Nieves-Ramírez ME, Partida-Rodríguez O, Laforest-Lapointe I, Reynolds LA, Brown EM, Valdez-Salazar A, et al. Asymptomatic Intestinal Colonization with Protist Blastocystis Is Strongly Associated with Distinct Microbiome Ecological Patterns. mSystems. 2018;3. https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00007-18 54. O’Brien Andersen L, Karim AB, Roager HM, Vigsnæs LK, Krogfelt KA, Licht TR, et al. Associations between common intestinal parasites and bacteria in humans as revealed by qPCR. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2016;35:1427–31. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-016-2680-2 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

55. Audebert C, Even G, Cian A, Blastocystis Investigation Group, Loywick A, Merlin S, et al. Colonization with the enteric protozoa Blastocystis is associated with increased diversity of human gut bacterial microbiota. Sci Rep. 2016;6:25255. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep25255 56. Fricke WF, Seedorf H, Henne A, Krüer M, Liesegang H, Hedderich R, et al. The Genome Sequence of Methanosphaera stadtmanae Reveals Why This Human Intestinal Archaeon Is Restricted to Methanol and H2 for Methane Formation and ATP Synthesis. J Bacteriol. 2006;188:642–58. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.188.2.642-658.2006 57. Pavlostathis SG, Miller TL, Wolin MJ. Cellulose fermentation by continuous cultures of Ruminococcus albus and Methanobrevibacter smithii. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1990;33:109– 16. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00170581 58. Chassard C, Delmas E, Robert C, Lawson PA, Bernalier-Donadille A. Ruminococcus champanellensis sp. nov., a cellulose-degrading bacterium from human gut microbiota. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2012;62:138–43. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.027375-0 59. Ze X, Duncan SH, Louis P, Flint HJ. Ruminococcus bromii is a keystone species for the degradation of resistant starch in the human colon. ISME J. Nature Publishing Group; 2012;6:1535–43. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2012.4 60. Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Shima T, Imaoka A, Kuwahara T, Momose Y, et al. Induction of colonic regulatory T cells by indigenous Clostridium species. Science. New York, N.Y.; 2011;331:337–41. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1198469 61. Appert O, Garcia AR, Frei R, Roduit C, Constancias F, Neuzil-Bunesova V, et al. Initial butyrate producers during infant gut microbiota development are endospore formers. Environmental Microbiology. 2020;22:3909–21. https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.15167 62. Louis P, Flint HJ. Diversity, metabolism and microbial ecology of butyrate-producing bacteria from the human large intestine. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2009;294:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2009.01514.x 63. Hehemann J-H, Correc G, Barbeyron T, Helbert W, Czjzek M, Michel G. Transfer of carbohydrate-active enzymes from marine bacteria to Japanese gut microbiota. Nature. 2010;464:908–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08937 64. Jensen NS, Canale-Parola E. Bacteroides pectinophilus sp. nov. and Bacteroides galacturonicus sp. nov.: two pectinolytic bacteria from the human intestinal tract. Applied and Environmental Microbiology. American Society for Microbiology; 1986;52:880–7. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.52.4.880-887.1986 65. Daniel SL, Moradi L, Paiste H, Wood KD, Assimos DG, Holmes RP, et al. Forty Years of Oxalobacter formigenes, a Gutsy Oxalate-Degrading Specialist. Applied and Environmental Microbiology. American Society for Microbiology; 2021;87:e00544-21. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00544-21 66. PeBenito A, Nazzal L, Wang C, Li H, Jay M, Noya-Alarcon O, et al. Comparative prevalence of Oxalobacter formigenes in three human populations. Sci Rep. 2019;9:574. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36670-z 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

67. Alexander M, Ang QY, Nayak RR, Bustion AE, Sandy M, Zhang B, et al. Human gut bacterial metabolism drives Th17 activation and colitis. Cell Host Microbe. 2021;S1931-3128(21)00507-2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2021.11.001 68. Shin Y-H, Bang S, Xavier R, Clardy J. Eggerthella lenta Produces a Cryptic Pro-inflammatory Lipid. J Am Chem Soc. 147:25180–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c08613 69. Henke MT, Kenny DJ, Cassilly CD, Vlamakis H, Xavier RJ, Clardy J. Ruminococcus gnavus, a member of the human gut microbiome associated with Crohn’s disease, produces an inflammatory polysaccharide. PNAS. National Academy of Sciences; 2019;116:12672–7. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1904099116 70. Hall AB, Yassour M, Sauk J, Garner A, Jiang X, Arthur T, et al. A novel Ruminococcus gnavus clade enriched in inflammatory bowel disease patients. Genome Med. 2017;9:103. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-017-0490-5 71. Schaus SR, Vasconcelos Pereira G, Luis AS, Madlambayan E, Terrapon N, Ostrowski MP, et al. Ruminococcus torques is a keystone degrader of intestinal mucin glycoprotein, releasing oligosaccharides used by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. mBio. 2024;15:e0003924. https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00039-24 72. Warren YA, Tyrrell KL, Citron DM, Goldstein EJC. Clostridium aldenense sp. nov. and Clostridium citroniae sp. nov. Isolated from Human Clinical Infections. J Clin Microbiol. 2006;44:2416–22. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.00116-06 73. Cherny KE, Muscat EB, Reyna ME, Kociolek LK. Clostridium innocuum: Microbiological and clinical characteristics of a potential emerging pathogen. Anaerobe. 2021;71:102418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anaerobe.2021.102418 74. de Boer MD-, Schuurs TA, Vermeer M, Ruijs GJHM, van der Zanden AGM, Weel JF, et al. Distribution and relevance of Dientamoeba fragilis and Blastocystis species in gastroenteritis: results from a case-control study. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2020;39:197–203. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-019-03710-z 75. Tchamwa Bamini G, Charpentier E, Guemas E, Chauvin P, Fillaux J, Valentin A, et al. No evidence of pathogenicity of Dientamoeba fragilis following detection in stools: A case-control study. Parasite. 2024;31:40. https://doi.org/10.1051/parasite/2024041 76. Krogsgaard LR, Engsbro AL, Stensvold CR, Nielsen HV, Bytzer P. The prevalence of intestinal parasites is not greater among individuals with irritable bowel syndrome: a population-based case-control study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015;13:507-513.e2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2014.07.065 77. Scanlan PD, Stensvold CR, Rajilić-Stojanović M, Heilig HGHJ, De Vos WM, O’Toole PW, et al. The microbial eukaryote Blastocystis is a prevalent and diverse member of the healthy human gut microbiota. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2014;90:326–30. https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6941.12396 78. Aldridge KE, Ashcraft D, O’Brien M, Sanders CV. Bacteremia Due to Bacteroides fragilis Group: Distribution of Species, β-Lactamase Production, and Antimicrobial Susceptibility Patterns. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2003;47:148–53. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint

https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.47.1.148-153.2003 79. Frau A, Kenny JG, Lenzi L, Campbell BJ, Ijaz UZ, Duckworth CA, et al. DNA extraction and amplicon production strategies deeply inf luence the outcome of gut mycobiome studies. Sci Rep. 2019;9:9328. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-44974-x 80. Conlon BH, Schmidt S, Poulsen M, Shik JZ. Orthogonal protocols for DNA extraction from filamentous fungi. STAR Protoc. 2022;3:101126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xpro.2022.101126 81. Ajjampur SSR, Png CW, Chia WN, Zhang Y, Tan KSW. Ex Vivo and In Vivo Mice Models to Study Blastocystis spp. Adhesion, Colonization and Pathology: Closer to Proving Koch’s Postulates. PLOS ONE. Public Library of Science; 2016;11:e0160458. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0160458 82. Defaye M, Nourrisson C, Baudu E, Warwzyniak I, Bonnin V, Bonnet M, et al. Efficient and reproducible experimental infections of rats with Blastocystis spp. PLOS ONE. Public Library of Science; 2018;13:e0207669. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0207669 83. Billy V, Lhotská Z, Jirků M, Kadlecová O, Frgelecová L, Parfrey LW, et al. Blastocystis Colonization Alters the Gut Microbiome and, in Some Cases, Promotes Faster Recovery From Induced Colitis. Front Microbiol [Internet]. Frontiers; 2021 [cited 2021 May 31];12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2021.641483 84. Mann AE, Mazel F, Lemay MA, Morien E, Billy V, Kowalewski M, et al. Biodiversity of protists and nematodes in the wild nonhuman primate gut. ISME J. Nature Publishing Group; 2020;14:609–22. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-019-0551-4 85. Tikhonenkov DV, Mikhailov KV, Gawryluk RMR, Belyaev AO, Mathur V, Karpov SA, et al. Microbial predators form a new supergroup of eukaryotes. Nature. 2022;612:714–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05511-5 86. Lukeš J, Stensvold CR, Jirků-Pomajbíková K, Parfrey LW. Are Human Intestinal Eukaryotes Beneficial or Commensals? PLOS Pathogens. 2015;11:e1005039. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005039 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint 97% (species) 99% (strain)

040,000 80,000 120,000 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 ANI (%) Count 

# A Average nucleotide identity between eukaryotic genomes 4,135 1,419 405 204 364 421 

n=5,959 n=989 02,000 4,000 6,000 Fungi Protists Number of representative genomes Ascomycota Basidiomycota Other Fungi Stramenopiles Alveolates Other Protists 

# B Taxonomic composition of EukDetect 2 database 020 40 60 80 100 Equal coverage 0.25x Equal coverage 1x M. restricta dominant Blastocystis dominant G. duodenalis dominant RelEuk (%) 

2460.25x 0.5x 0.75x 1x Per−genome c overage RPKSB 

# BSpecies 

Malassezia restricta Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 Giardia duodenalis Expected Observed 

## Species 

Malassezia restricta Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 Giardia duodenalis 

Expected (linear) Observed 

# A .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint Blastocystis subtype 3 Entamoeba dispar Saccharomyces cerevisiae 

> EukDetect  MetaPhlAn4  CORRAL
> 0.003 0.010 0.030 0.100 0.300 1.000 0.03 0.10 0.30 1.00 0.003 0.010 0.030 0.100 0.300 1.000 025 50 75 100 025 50 75 100 025 50 75 100

Simulated genome coverage (log scale) % of 6 replicates detected 

A

Blastocystis subtype 3 Entamoeba dispar Saccharomyces cerevisiae 

> EukDetect  MetaPhlAn4  CORRAL
> 0.003 0.010 0.030 0.100 0.300 1.000 0.03 0.10 0.30 1.00 0.003 0.010 0.030 0.100 0.300 1.000 025 50 75 100 025 50 75 100 025 50 75 100

Simulated genome coverage (log scale) 

> % of 6 replicates with >0 off−target euka ryote hit

B

> EukDetect v1 EukDetect2
> MetaPhlAn4 (default) MetaPhlAn4 (relaxed) CORRAL(default) CORRAL(relaxed)
> EukDetect v1 EukDetect2
> MetaPhlAn4 (default) MetaPhlAn4 (relaxed) CORRAL(default) CORRAL(relaxed)

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint Ruminococcus torques Eggerthella lenta Flavonifractor plautii Evtepia gabavorous Alistipes finegoldii Dysosmobacter welbionis Alistipes onderdonkii Gordonibacter pamelaeae Adlercreutzia equolifaciens Ruthenibacterium lactatiformans Clostridium leptum Bacteroides fragilis Blautia hydrogenotrophica Gordonibacter urolithinfaciens Anaeromassilibacillus senegalensis Mediterraneibacter gnavus Alistipes putredinis Wansuia hejianensis Roseburia intestinalis Lawsonibacter asaccharolyticus Enterocloster bolteae Clostridium innocuum Thomasclavelia spiroformis Mediterraneibacter glycyrrhizinilyticus Agathobaculum faecis Eisenbergiella tayi Anaerotruncus colihominis Faecalicatena contorta Clostridiales bacterium Bilophila wadsworthia Bianquea renquensis Hydrogeniiclostridium mannosilyticum Blautia faecis Amedibacillus dolichus Massilioclostridium coli Gallintestinimicrobium propionicum Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum Enterocloster citroniae Oscillibacter valericigenes Mediterraneibacter massiliensis Pseudoflavonifractor capillosus Pilosibacter fragilis Faecalibacterium hattorii Segatella brunsvicensis Hominiventricola filiformis Methanosphaera stadtmanae Ruminococcus champanellensis Ruminococcus bromii Blautia faecicola Phocaeicola plebeius Ruminococcus callidus Faecalibacterium wellingii Bacteroides pectinophilus Haemophilus parainfluenzae Dysosmobacter segnis Jingyaoa shaoxingensis Victivallis lenta Oscillospiraceae bacterium Slackia isoflavoniconvertens Victivallis vadensis Vescimonas fastidiosa Oxalobacter aliiformigenes Coprococcus eutactus Hominifimenecus microfluidus Butyricicoccus intestinisimiae Neopoerus faecalis Roseburia zhanii Roseburia lenta Eshraghiella crossota Flintibacter faecis Alistipes senegalensis Wujia chipingensis Methanobrevibacter smithii 

−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

Pooled CLR effect size 

point = estimate, bar = 95% CI 

Wilcoxon p = 2.75e−59 010 20 30 40 −50% 0% 50% 

Prevalence difference 

(non−indust rializ ed − indust rialized) 

> Number of taxa
> Blastocystis−depleted Blastocystis−en riched

# A B .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734308 doi: bioRxiv preprint