Title: Integrating suboptimal secondary structures, AI-assisted genomic synteny, and evolutionary conservation to identify bacterial ncRNA homologs beyond sequence similarity

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
1

Integrating suboptimal secondary structures, AI -assisted genomic synteny, and 

evolutionary conservation to identify bacterial ncRNA homologs beyond sequence similarity 

Josef  Pánek 

Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of 

Sciences , Vídeňská 1083, 142 00 Prague 4, Czech Republic 

panek@biomed.cas.cz 

ABSTRACT 

A bioinformatic approach for genome -wide identification of homologs of bacterial 

non -coding RNAs (ncRNAs) integrating structural similarity, genomic synten y, and 

evolutionary conservation is presented. 

The structural similarity is detected using an algorithm for genome -wide identification 

of loci in genomic intergenic regions (IGRs) containing sequences capable of adopting 

secondary structures similar to tha t of the query ncRNA. The algorithm scans IGR sequences 

using a sliding window with a predefined step. For each window, suboptimal secondary 

structures are predicted and compared with the template structure to compute structural 

similarity scores. These sc ores are evaluated statistically on a genome -wide scale to infer 

homology of the RNAs represented by the predicted structures. 

Loci encoding statistically significant structures are further filtered using genomic 

synteny of the query ncRNAs inferred from g enomic annotations. ChatGPT was used to assist 

in identifying literature -supported biological relationships between genes with distinct 

functional annotations. Syntenic loci with the structures are then examined for homologs in 

related species, as evolutio nary conservation among related species is a common feature of 

ncRNAs 

Using this approach, we predicted novel homologs of the spot42 RNA -encoding spf 

gene in Glaciecola and Pseudoalteromonas genomes, and ms1 RNA genes in Frankia and 

Bifidobacterium genomes, where previous homology searches had failed. 

GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT 

INTRODUCTION 

Bacterial genomes encode a wide variety of non -coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that 

participate in many cellular processes, ranging from gene expression to cell wall biogenesis 

and maintenance. Although some ncRNAs act through base pairing with target RNAs, their 

fun ctions are often determined not only by primary sequence but also by conserved structural 

features (1) . As a result, conventional sequence -based homology searches are often 

insufficient, particularly when ncRNAs are short, rapidly evolving, conserved mainly at the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

structural level, or when homologs are sought in evolutionarily distant organisms, where 

sequence similarity may no longer be detectable. This limitation has motivated the 

development of computational approaches that incorporate RNA secondary structure, 

co mparative conservation, and probabilistic models of RNA families (2 -4) .

RNA secondary structure is a key feature that can be conserved among homolog ous 

ncRNAs even when their nucleotide sequences have diverged. As a result, secondary 

structures of ncRNAs can be used as a tool for identification of ncRNA homologs rather than 

primary sequences. Still the use of secondary structures in homology searches is limited by 

the inaccuracy of the RNA structure prediction and difficulties in experimental identification 

of the RNA structures. 

The prediction mostly relies on minimum free energy (MFE) structures as a proxy for 

the native structure. However, a single MFE structure may not adequately describe the 

structural behavior of an RNA molecule, because RNA sequences can populate ensembles of 

alternative conformations and energetically close structures (5) ; (6) . Suboptimal structures —

those with higher free energies (FEs) than the MFE structure —can therefore provide useful 

information about structurally plausible states, structural diversity, and alternative 

conformations, particularly for RNAs that undergo functional structural rearrangements or 

populate multiple folds (7) (8) . The reason is that native conformations of RNA molec ules 

are formed under conditions in the cells that correspond to higher FEs (9,10) . Recent reviews 

of RNA structure and RNA –RNA interaction prediction also emphasize the importance of 

ensemble -based and suboptimal -structure approaches rather than relying exclusively on a 

singl e optimal fold (11) .

Recent studies ha ve emphasized the importance of incorporating sets of suboptimal 

structures to improve the prediction and interpretation of RNA conformations (12) (13) (14) 

(15) . Rather than relying on a single predicted structure, analyzing a broader structural 

ensemble allows for a more biologically reliably prediction of RNA folding and function. 

This ensemble -based perspec tive can be particularly valuable when experimental data suggest 

a structure that deviates significantly from the MFE prediction. The use of suboptimal 

secondary structures still remains limited due to the computational and evaluation challenges 

related to them (16) (17) (18) (19) (8) (20) .

The st ructure -based genome -wide searches can produce false -positive candidates, 

because even low false -positive rates can generate many spurious predictions when large 

genomic search spaces are scanned (21) . Intergenic regions may contain local sequences that 

form structures resembling a query RNA by chance. For this reason, structural evidence 

should be interpreted together with independent biological signals. Genomic synteny provides 

one such signal based on the conservation of the genomic neighborhood surrounding ncRNA 

genes. In bacterial ncRNAs discovery, conserved flanking genes, gene synteny, and genomic 

backbone retention have been used to identify candidate ncRNA homologs across related 

genomes (22) . More generally, bacterial gene order is not random, and conserved synteny 

reflects functional and evolutionary constraints on genome organization (23) . Thus, syntenic 

context can help distinguish true homologous loci from unrelated regions producing 

structurally si milar folds .

Evolutionary conservation among closely related species provides a further criterion 

for ncRNA gene identification. Functional ncRNAs are expected to be maintained over 

evolutionary time, particularly among related genomes in which homologous loci can often 

still be recognized. The presence of structurally similar candidates in corresponding genomic 

contexts across multiple related species supports the interpretation that these loci encode 

conserved ncRNA homologs rather than isolated structura l artifacts. Thus, the integration of 

structural similarity, genomic synteny, and evolutionary conservation offers a more reliable 

framework than any single criterion alone. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

In this work, we present an integrative bioinformatics approach for genome -wide 

id entification of bacterial ncRNA homologs. The method searches genomic intergenic regions 

using a sliding -window procedure and evaluates whether each window can adopt secondary 

structures similar to a query ncRNA. For each genomic window, suboptimal seconda ry 

structures are predicted and compared with the template structure of the query ncRNA, 

allowing the method to capture structural similarity beyond a single optimal folding solution. 

Candidate loci with statistically significant structural similarity are then filtered using 

genomic synteny inferred from genome annotations in genomic contexts of the query ncRNA. 

Finally, syntenic candidates are examined across closely related species to assess evolutionary 

conservation. 

By combining these complementary sour ces of evidence, the proposed approach is 

designed to improve the detection of ncRNA homologs that are missed by conventional 

sequence -based searches. The integration of suboptimal structure analysis with genomic 

context and comparative conservation provid es a framework for identifying structurally 

conserved ncRNA genes in bacterial genomes, including cases where sequence similarity is 

weak or absent. We demonstrate the utility of this strategy by predicting novel homologs of 

the spot42 RNA -encoding spf gen e in Glaciecola and Pseudoalteromonas genomes, as well as 

homologs of ms1 RNA genes in Frankia and Bifidobacterium genomes, where previous 

homology searches had failed. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Genome –wide structure search algorithm 

The algorithm for gen ome –wide structure search picks up the loci in subject sequences 

with structure similarity to structure templates. The subject sequences can be any nucleotide 

sequence. The templates are RNA secondary structures. The approach is demonstrated here 

with iden tification of homologs of bacterial regulatory non -coding RNAs (ncRNAs), therefore 

the templates are experimentally determined secondary structures of selected ncRNAs whose 

homologs were searched for. These structures were obtained from the Protein Data Ba nk 

(PDB) and from published scientific literature. The subject sequences were genomic 

intergenic regions (IGRs) where ncRNA genes reside. The genomes were obtained from 

public databases, primarily NCBI GenBank . IGRs in which homologs of the templates are 

searched are extracted from genomes using coordinates of the genes annotated in the 

genomes. Templates and genomes used for testing the algorithm are listed in Supplementary 

Tables S1. 

The algorithm is based on a scanning approach via a sliding window using templates. 

The sliding window moves along IGR sequences in fixed steps of a predefined number of 

nucleotides, generating subsequences of length equal to the window size. The step size was 

set to 5 nucleotides as a compromise between the speed and accuracy of the algorithm. It was 

a maximal possible step for not to miss subsequences in IGRs with the global free energy 

(FE) minimum. The window length corresponds to the length of the query ncRNA, but also 

may be set manually when the expected length of the id entified homolog differs from that of 

the template. 

For each subsequence, suboptimal secondary structures is predicted. For this purpose, 

UNAfold [29] was used. The prediction generates ensembles of suboptimal secondary 

structures that sample the folding space of each subsequence. The ensembles enabled analysis 

of folding trends rather than relying on a single structure, such as the commonly used 

minimum free energy (MFE) structure, which provides only limited structural information. 

The similarity between predicted suboptimal secondary structures and the template 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

were computed. All suboptimal secondary structures of individual subsequences were 

compared to the template. For this comparison, RNAdistance [30] was used to calculate tree 

edit distances (TEDs), where lower values indicated higher similarity. TEDs were then used 

to compute scores for all subsequences across IGRs in the searched genomes. Subsequences 

in IGRs with the best scores were selected as candidate loci most likely to encode the sought 

homo logs. 

Multiple suboptimal secondary structures predicted for single subsequences made it 

possible to define multiple scores that grasped different aspects of structural similarity. The 

scores were tested using the test searches. In this project, five scor e definitions were proposed 

as follows: 

ss = min{ min {TED i,j | i = 1, …, nj}j | j = 1, ..., m},

sm = min{ mean {TED i,j | i = 1, …, nj}j | j = 1, ..., m},

𝑠 3 = min  

> 𝑗 =1,…,𝑚

{ 1 

> min (3,𝑛 𝑗 )

∑ 𝑇𝐸𝐷 (𝑘 ),𝑗  

> min (3,𝑛 𝑗 )
> 𝑘 =1

}, where the values TED i,j for a fixed j are 

sorted in ascending order, i.e. TED (1),j ≤ TED (2),j ≤ ⸱⸱⸱ ≤ TED (𝑛 𝑗 ),j ,

d* = max{min( mean {TED k,i,j | i = 1, …, nj}j | k = 1, …, r) - mean {TED i,j | i = 1, …, nj}j

| j = 1, ..., m},

dm = max{mean( mean {TED k,i,j | i = 1, …, nj}j | k = 1, …, r) - mean {TED i,j | i = 1, …,

nj}j | j = 1, ..., m},

where nj=1 ,…, m, are numbers of suboptimal secondary structures for jth of the total m

subsequences of a subject sequence, TED i,j is a tree edit distance between the ith suboptimal 

secondary structure of the jth subsequence and the template, and TED k,i,j is a tree edit distance 

between the ith suboptimal secondary structure of the kth version with randomly shuffled 

dinucleotides of the jth subsequence and the template. m is given by the size of the sliding 

wi ndow, the size of the sliding step, and the length the subject sequence. 

Candidates to homologs in IGRs in an inspected genome were obtained, with one 

candidate produced per IGR, i.e. ss = min{ 𝑠 𝑙  

> 𝑠

| l = 1, …, o}, sm = min{ 𝑠 𝑙  

> 𝑚

| l = 1, …, o}, s3 =

min{ 𝑠 𝑙  

> 3

| l = 1, …, o}, dm = min{ 𝑑 𝑙  

> 𝑚

| l = 1, …, o}, and d* = min{ 𝑑 𝑙  

> ∗

| l = 1, …, o}, where o is 

a number of subject sequences and dm, d*, ss, sm, s3 are vectors. 

The biologically reliable candidates were then selected from these sets. To achieve 

this, the individual scores of candidates were compared using a two -sample t -test against the 

scores of all other candidates identified within the same genome. This testing produced two 

sets of p -values corresponding to the scores, as follows: 

pl = t -test( sc l, sc 1...l -1,l+1...o ), where pl was p -value of lth subject sequence, l = 1,..., o,

where o is the number of subject sequences, and sc l was one of the score vectors defined 

above. Note that o was also the number of IGRs in searched genomes, as on e IGR had one 

sequence with candidate with secondary structure most similar to the template. The 

probability level of the test was set to α = 0.05. 

The scores were tested for their efficiency using the test searches as described in the 

Results section. 

Test searches 

Test searches were proceeded using known bacterial non -coding RNAs (ncRNAs) 

with experimentally determined secondary structures. Representative ncRNAs were selected 

from Rfam 1 5.1 (24) and from the literature (Supplementary Table S1, sequences and 

structures are provided in Supplementary File S1.fa). Secondary structures were obtained 

from PDB entries (25) or from published sources. Riboswitches were excluded because they 

are parts of larger structural complexes and are not function al as standalone RNAs. 

The presented genome –wide structure search algorithm searched for known homologs 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

of the query ncRNAs. Multiple homologs were used for a single query ncRNA from 

differently evolutionarily distant bacterial species to test the evoluti onary range the algorithm 

is able to grasp. Also homologs with no detectable sequence similarity were included to find 

out if the search is able to make such an evolutionary divergence (Supplementary Table S2). 

Fifteen ncRNA families were collected, each containing at least one experimentally 

defined structure and multiple known homologs (Supplementary Table S2). From these, 48 

predictions were assembled (Table 1), each searching for homologs of a query ncRNA in 

diverse bacterial genomes. Both small and la rge RNAs were included to assess size 

dependence of the search. 

Table 1. Summary of test searches. For details see Supplementary Table S2. 

Query ncRNA  Query species  Subject species 

SRP bact 

small/large  E. coli 

Thermotoga caldifontis  SRP bact large 

Thermotoga profunda 

Mycobacterium avium 

SRP bact small 

Thermus thermophilus 

Thermus thermophilus, search with 

predicted template structure 

6S  E. coli 

Bacillus subtilis 

Burkholderia seminalis 

Rhizobium etli 

5S  E. coli  Pyrococcus furiosus 

Synechococcus elongatus 

RsmZ  P. aeruginosa 

Halopseudomonas pachastrellae 

Azotobacter vinelandii 

Azomonas agilis 

Azomonas agilis , search with predicted template 

structure 

oxys  E. coli 

Trabulsiella odontotermitis 

Yokenella regensburgei 

Lelliottia nimipressuralis 

spot42  E. coli 

Vibrio ishigakensis 

Arsukibacterium perlucidum 

Arsukibacterium tuosuense 

Photobacterium aquae 

ms1  M. smegmatis 

Rhodococcus gannanensis 

Saccharothrix coeruleofusca 

Streptomyces violaceolatus 

Gordonia polyisoprenivorans 

Gordonia effusa 

Gordonia araii 

Actinosynnema pretiosum 

Aldersonia kunmingensis 

Actinoalloteichus spitiensis 

gcvb  S. typhimurium 

Haemophilus influenzae 

Photobacterium aquae 

Haemophilus influenzae  searches with predicted 

template structure Photobacterium aquae 

DsrA  E. coli  Cedecea neteri 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Cedecea davisae 

Citrobacter gillenii 

tRNA  E. coli  Thermotoga maritima 

Streptomyces halobius 

RnaseP bact a  E. coli 

Thermotoga caldifontis 

Thermotoga profunda 

Pseudofrankia saprophytica 

Amedibacillus hominis 

Thermotoga maritima 

16S RNA  E. coli 

micF  E. coli  S. enterica 

S. bongori 

ryhB  E. coli  V. cholerae eltor 

V. cholerae RFB16 

Synteny -based filtering 

The aim of the synteny -based filtering was to identify the genomic contexts of the 

structure candidates biologically/functionally consistent with the synteny of the query 

ncRNAs. The contexts were successions of genomic annotations of up to 7 genes located 

upstream and downstream of the IGRs containing the candidates. The annotations were 

obtained from NCBI feature table files. The filtering was accomplished using synteny phrases 

inferred from the genomic contexts of known homologs of the query ncRNAs were inferred 

and identified in genomic contexts of structure candidates. 

Synteny phrases were text phrases consisting of most repeating words in genomic 

annotation of genes flanking multiple homologs of query ncRNAs. The phrases did not 

contain nonspecific words that were typically these: ‘ hypothetical ’, ‘protein ’, ‘type ’, ‘family ’, 

‘domain ’, ‘putative ’, ‘precursor ’, ‘component ’, ‘subunit ’, ‘subfamily ’, ‘conserved ’, ‘chain ’, 

‘or ’, ‘superfamily ’, ‘unknown ’, ‘ribosomal ’, ‘function ’, ‘of ’, ‘conserved ’, ‘like ’, ‘containing ’, 

‘II ’, ‘and ’, ‘short ’, ‘dependent ’, ‘probable ’, ‘associated ’, ‘to ’, ‘that ’, ‘the ’, ‘predicted ’, 

‘uncharacterized ’, ‘production ’, ‘fold ’, ‘in ’, ‘by ’, ‘universal ’, ‘pathway ’, ‘involved ’, ‘related ’, 

‘binding’, ‘general ’, ‘group ’, ‘sequence ’, ‘class ’, ‘cluster ’, ‘accepting ’, ‘determining ’.

These repeating words were also specific, i.e. they characterized specific biological 

aspects of gene function. E.g. the ‘ ribosome biogenesis GTP -binding protein YihA/YsxC’ 

annotation contained two nonspeci fic words, ‘ binding’ and ‘protein’ and specific words 

‘ribosome’, ‘biogenesis’, ‘GTP’, ‘YihA’ and ‘YsxC’ .

Synteny phrases were generated from the most frequent specific words according to 

their co -occurrence in the annotations from which they were extrac ted and which defined their 

semantic binding. For example, the specific words shown above formed the following 

phrases: ‘ ribosome biogenesis GTP’, ‘YihA’ and ‘YsxC’. The phrases were typically two, for 

downstream and upstream parts of genomic contexts. Bot h the construction and the use of 

synteny phrases are demonstrated in the Use cases subsection in the Results section. 

Synteny phrases were identified among seven consecutive genes located both 

downstream and upstream of the IGRs containing statistically significant structural 

candidates. Seven genes were analyzed to cover a sufficiently long genomic range, allowing 

the identification of genes that were part of the original syntenic region of the subject 

ncRNAs, since insertions may have occurred between t hese genes. The presence of all words 

from any substring of a synteny phrase, in any order, within the annotations of a genomic 

context was considered evidence of synteny for the query ncRNA. If either the downstream or 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

upstream synteny phrase was detected on one side of a genomic context, the corresponding 

phrase was then searched for on the opposite side, accounting for the two possible genomic 

orientations. In some cases, only one part of the synteny could be detected, as the syntenic 

region was only par tially kept during evolution. 

The procedures required for the presented approach were coded in Matlab 

computational environment. The Matlab scripts are included in Supplementary File S11. 

RESULTS 

A bioinformatic approach for genome -wide identification of homologs of non -coding 

RNAs (ncRNAs) that integrates structure similarity, genomic synteny, and evolutionary 

conservation is presented. It consists of three steps: (i) genome –wide structure search, (ii) 

synteny -based filtering, and (iii) evolutionarily co nservation -based filtering. The overall 

scheme of the approach is shown in Figure 1. For further details, see the Materials and 

Methods section. 

Figure 1. Scheme of workflow of the presented approach. 

(i) Genome -wide structure search 

The search is implemented by a n algorithm for identifying loci in biological genomes 

that exhibit structure homology of biological molecules. The structure homology is indicative 

of the presence of genes of evolutionarily related molecules with the same function in 

geno mes of different biological species called homologs. Such molecules are kept during the 

evolution because their function is necessary for the species. To get biological relevance to 

encode for the homologs, the statistical test for the identified loci was developed. 

The molecules used in this project for both testing and demonstration of the presented 

approach, were bacterial regulatory non -coding RNAs (ncRNAs). Two homologs of each 

ncRNA described in literature and/or included in RNA databases were used, o ne as a query 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

and one as a target identified using the query. The genomes in which the target homologs 

were identified were obtained from public databases, primarily NCBI GenBank . The 

algorithm is described in details in the Genome –wide structure search al gorithm subsection of 

the Materials and Methods section. 

First, the algorithm was tested and validated using 48 test searches (Table 1, 

Supplementary Table S1, S2). Details on the test set are in the Test searches subsection of the 

Materials and Methods se ction. Of the 48 identified homologs, 43, 42, 41, 40 and 34 were 

identified as statistically significant by sm, s3, ss, dm and d* scores, respectively . The 

effectiveness of the scores for the test searches are shown in Supplementary Figure S1. 

Where it was applicable, predicted secondary structures were used instead of 

experimentally identified structures ( Supplementary Table S2) and t he test showed no 

difference between searches using either secondary structures, showing an applicability of the 

algorithm a lso with predicted secondary structures as templates. This part of the test was 

limited as only two ncRNAs with known homologs with substantially differing lengths were 

found .

The algorithm was also tested with different lengths of sliding window. This was 

possible for two query ncRNAs, 6S and ms1 RNAs. For these RNAs, experimentally 

identified homologs with their lengths differing substantially from those of the query were 

available. The lengths of query RNAs were 184 and 304 nucleotides for 6S and ms1 RNA s. 

The sequence lengths of their homologs in Rhizobium etli and several Actinomycetes 

identified in the test were ~160 and 227 nucleotides for 6S and ms1 RNAs. The test is 

summarized in Supplementary Figure S2 and demonstrated that the algorithm is highly 

length -responsive. This property adds an informative diagnostic capabilities to its uses 

making it applicable to identification of boundaries and size of the predicted RNAs. 

Besides the sought homologs, that were true positives (TPs), that were single in t he 

testing searches, also other candidates were identified as statistically significant that were 

considered false positives (FPs). Across 48 test searches on the genomes, the average number 

of false positives (FPs) and their proportion relative to IGRs fo r the five scores were 75 

(3.8%), 56 (2.8%), 56 (2.9%), 84 (4.1%), and 84 (4.1%), respectively. Different percentages 

for the same FP numbers were caused by different numbers of IGRs from different genomes ,

because FPs may have been identified in different genomes using different scores. 

The test showed that the numbers of FPs were still too high for unambiguous homolog 

identification. Still the search narrowed an occurrence of the test homologs in test genomes 

from typically thousands of IGRs per genome to tens, representing thus significant increase in 

precision. For identification TPs among these statistically significant candidates a synteny 

based specification was used .

(ii) Synteny -based filtering 

Synteny of ncRNAs was used to identify TPs among statistically significant structure 

candidates. TPs were homologous candidates that were expected to share at least partly 

syntenic genomic contexts. The syntenic agreement was identified by searching for 

ch aracteristic phrases, so called synteny phrases, derived from the genomic contexts of the 

query ncRNA and their homologs. Synteny phrase construction is described in the Synteny -

based filtering subsection of the Materials and Methods section. 

Using synteny , the strategy was to identify TPs within the sets of statistically 

significant structure candidates, each consisting of multiple FPs and a single TP, as 

determined by individual structure search scores. The sets were examined sequentially, 

considering onl y genomes in which no TP had been identified in previous sets (except for the 

first set). The sets were ordered by decreasing performance of the scores in test searches , i.e. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

sm, s3, ss, dm and d*. This was done in the following manner: 

select score i;

select searched genome j;

if there is not a syntenic candidate in genome j found by previous 

scores ;

select statistically significant structure candidates in genome j

identified by score i;

do the s ynteny -based filtering of the selected candidat es ;

save syntenic candidates among the selected candidates for 

genome j by score i, if any ;

next genome j + 1 ;

next score i + 1. 

The syntenic candidates were further inspected for evolutionary conservation as 

described in the following section. 

(iii) Evolutionary conservation -based filtering 

The syntenic candidates were checked for their evolutionary conservation. They were 

considered evolutionarily conserved when there existed similar sequences to them in 

evolutionarily closely related species in IG Rs with syntenic genomic contexts. 

Similar sequences were identified by BLAST of the sequences of the candidates in 

NCBI´s nt_prok and refseq_genomes databases with sensitive setting for cross -species 

exploration (with parameters -r 1 -q 1 -G 1 -E 2 -W 7 (26) with BLAST E -value threshold set 

to 0.05). 

IGRs with similar sequences were checked for synteny by searching the genomic 

annotations of t heir surrounding regions for synteny -related phrases, using the same approach 

as for the structural candidates. These IGRs contained putative homologs of the query 

ncRNAs, inferred from the statistically significant sequence similarity to syntenic structur al 

candidates that were also statistically significant. Therefore, these IGRs were also considered 

to contain putative homologs of the query ncRNAs. 

Use cases 

The presented approach is demonstrated using case studies focused on identifying new 

ncRNA homologs. These represent challenging ncRNA homolog identification problems in 

which standard sequence/structure - and synteny -based methods had failed or yielded 

uncertain results. The cases include searches for genes of spot 42 RNA homologs in 

Glaciecola and Pseudoalteromonas , and genes of ms1 RNA homologs in Frankia and 

Bifidobacterium (27) Vank ova Hausnerova, 2022 #683}. None of these homologs were 

included in 15.1 (24) .

The newly predicted homologs were found to be located in intergenic regions with 

conserved but modified syntenic contexts, likely shaped by evolutionary rearrangements. In 

Glaciecola and Pseudoalteromonas , the predicted homologous spf genes occurred near the 

original spf -associated genes, polA and yih A/ysxC, although additional conserved genes were 

inserted between them. In Frankia and Bifidobacterium , genes of potential ms1 RNA 

homologs were identified by expanding the synteny criteria to include functionally related 

septum -site, conjugation, secretio n, and pilus -associated genes. 

Overall, these use cases show that the approach can detect divergent ncRNA homologs 

that are difficult to identify by sequence similarity alone. A detailed description of each use 

case follows. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

spot 42 RNA genes in Glaciecol a

spot 42 RNA, encoded by the spf gene, was first characterized in Escherichia coli and 

later identified in several γ -proteobacterial orders based on sequence similarity (28) . In 

Glaciecola and Pseudoalteromonas genera, the existence of homologo us spf genes was 

questionable. The gene was reported in one species in each, but not in other species of these 

genera (27) .

Here, to identify the spf gene in Glaciecola , the first step of the presented approach, 

the genome -wide structure search was applied to 7 Glaciecola genomes downloaded from 

NCBI GenBank ( Supplementary Table S3 ). The template w as the E. coli spot 42 secondary 

structure and the sliding window was formed by 119 nucleotides, which was the length of the 

template sequence. 

As ea result, the algorithm identified in average 86 statistically significant structure 

candidates per genome using the sm score, which was in average 3.8% of all IGRs in the 

searched genomes. 

The candidates were subjected to the synteny -based filtering, done with the following 

synteny phrases: 

I. {'ribosome biogenesis GTP' OR 'ribosome GTPase' OR 

'YihA' OR 'YsxC' OR 'EngB'} ;

II. {'DNA polymerase I' OR 'polA'} .

The synteny phrases were derived from the annotations of the genes adjacent to IGRs 

containing known spf genes. In these cases, the spf -containing IGR was flanked by a gene 

annotated as “ribosome biogenesis GTP -binding protein YihA/YsxC” or “EngB” on one side 

and a gene annotated as “DNA polymerase I” on the other. These flanking genes were 

strongly cons erved across species with known spf genes included in the Rfam database (data 

not shown), and this conserved syntenic context was also used in Baekkedal et al. 2015. 

The genomic context of a statistically significant structure candidate was considered 

synt enic if any string of one phrase occurred in either the upstream or downstream part of the 

context, while any string the other phrase occurred in the opposite part. 

The synteny -based filtering identified syntenic structure candidates in G. sp. 

HTCC2999 , G. sp. MH2013 , G. sp. 2405UD65 -10 and G. sp. MF2 -115 .

In the remaining 3 species, the s3 score was applied to identify statistically significant 

structure candidates, producing in average ~102 statistically significant candidates per 

genome which was in av erage 4% of all IGRs in the genomes. Among the candidates, the 

syntenic ones were identified in G. sp. KUL10 and G. sp. 33A .

In the remaining species, G. siphonariae , the syntenic candidate was identified among 

113 statistically significant structure candi dates making it 4% of all IGRs in G. siphonariae 

genome produced by the score dm. The sequences and genomic data of the candidates can be 

found in Supplementary File S2 and their secondary structures in Supplementary File S3. 

Next, the syntenic candidates were tested for their evolutionary conservation. The 

sequences of the candidates were BLASTed against the refseq_genomes database in the 

Alteromonadales order to limit the search to related species. In the species in which IGRs 

with sequence similarity wer e detected by BLAST, the spf synteny was checked using the 

same synteny -bases filtering as for the candidates described above. 

The G. sp. HTCC2999 , G. sp. MF2 -115, G. sp. KUL10, G. sp. 33A and G. siphonariae 

candidates had statistically significant sequence similarity to 43, 3, 2, 9 and 4 IGRs in various 

related Alteromonadales species that also exhibited the spf synteny , respectively . The species 

are listed in Supplementary File S3. Among these species, anot her 4 Glaciecola species were 

identified, namely Glaciecola sp. SC05 , Glaciecola sp. G7 -5, Glaciecola sp. 1036 and 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

Glaciecola sp. XM2 124 . Their IGRs with the sequence similarity to the syntenic candidates 

could be considered as containing another spf cand idates, as they had spf -syntenic genomic 

contexts and statistically significant sequence similarity to the candidates. 

No sequence similarity -homologs were found for G. sp. MH2013 and G. sp. 

2405UD65 -10 , but the latter was found among the species with seq uence similarity to the 

candidates, validating its prediction. Thus, except for the G. sp. MH2013 candidate, the 

candidates identified in the remaining 6 Glaciecola species were proposed as Glaciecola spf 

homologs, as they were spf -syntenic and evolutionarily conserved , and exhibited sequence 

similarity to spf -syntenic IGRs in mutiple evolutionarily related species. 

The scheme showing the genomic contexts of the proposed Glaciecola spf homologs 

identified by the presented approach is shown in Figure 2. The broader genomic contexts are 

shown in Supplementary Figure S4. As shown in Figure 2, four candidates, G. sp. KUL10 , G. 

sp. 33A , G. siphonariae and G. sp. HTCC2999 , retained the original spf gene context known 

from γ-Proteobacteria that is DNA polymerase I (polA) and ribosome biogenesis GTP -

binding protein YihA/YsxC. The remaining two proposed spf homologs in G. sp. 2405UD65 

and G. sp. MF2 , and the candidate in G. sp. MH2013 with unverified evolutionary 

conservation, showed partial synteny: the yihA/ysxC gene was preserved, but polA was 

separated from the spf genes by two to five intervening genes, most likely as a result of local 

genomic rearrangements during the evolution retaining immediate partial genomic context of 

yihA/ysxC gene. 

Figure 2. Genomic contexts of Glaciecola spf homologs predicted using the presented 

approach. The contexts are organized in rows of arrow shapes beneath each other, each for 

one Glaciecola species. The species are indicated by their names on the left. The shapes 

depict genes, the spaces between them are IGRs. The spf homologs are indicated by the spf 

labels. Lengths of the both shapes and spaces correspond to lengths of genes and IGRs. The 

shapes point in the direction of genomic orientation of the genes. T he shapes are labeled by 

shortcuts of gene annotations, shown in full in the legend. The Glaciecola species are marked 

by species names on the left. They are: G. sp. KUL10 (G. KUL10), G. sp. HTCC2999 (G. 

HTCC2999), G. sp. 2405UD65 -10 (G. 2405UD65), G. sp. 33A (G. 33A), G. sp. MH2013 (G. 

MH2013), G. sp. MF2 -115 (G. MF2) and G. siphonariae (G. siph). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

spf homologs in Pseudoalteromonas 

In this use case, six Pseudoalteromonas genomes from NCBI GenBank 

(Supplementary Table S3 ) were searched for spf homologs. The structure search was done 

with the same template and the sliding windows length as for the Glaciecola use case. 

Using the sm score, the structure search identified in average 109 statistically 

significant candidates per genome that was in average 4.3% of all IGRs in the genomes. 

Among them, syntenic candidates were identified in four species, P. atlantica , P. 

maricaloris , P. ma rina and P. haloplanktis , using the same synteny phrases as for the 

previous use case. Their genomic contexts contained both genes of the original spf synteny, 

polA and yihA/ysxC, but another genes were inserted between them (Figure 3). The inserted 

genes were repeating among the four species, indicating their evolutionary conservation, 

unlike in Glaciecola , where the inserted genes differed among species .

Figure 3. Genomic contexts of Pseudoalteromonas spf homologs predicted using the 

presented approach. The contexts are organized in rows of arrow shapes beneath each other, 

each for one Pseudoalteromonas species. The species are indicated by their names on the left. 

The shapes depict genes, the spaces betwe en them are IGRs. The spf homologs are indicated 

by the spf labels. Lengths of the both shapes and spaces correspond to lengths of genes and 

IGRs. The shapes point in the direction of genomic orientation of the genes. The shapes are 

labeled by shortcuts of gene annotations, shown in full in the legend. The Pseudoalteromonas 

species are marked by species names on the left. They are: P. haloplanktis (P. haloplanktis), 

P. maricaloris (P. maricaloris), P. atlantica (P. atlantica ), P. marina (P. marina ), P. simp lex 

(P. simplex ) and P. piratica (P. piratica). 

As the inserted genes appeared to be conserved, a new synteny Ia was designed :

Ia. {['ribosome biogenesis GTP' OR 'ribosome GTPase' OR 

'YihA' OR 'YsxC' OR 'EngB'] AND 'YceI’} .

Using the phrase Ia, a genomic context was considered syntenic if any string of both 

the sub -phrases of the phrase I occurred in its either upstream or downstream part, while the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

the phrase II was not used. 

This synteny -based filtering identified another syntenic candidate in P. simplex with 

genomic context with YceI and yihA/ysxC genes, whereas polA was missing. Manual search 

for polA in P. simplex genomic annotations showed polA located far in the genome from the 

predicted spf gene, thus also from YceI and yihA/ysxC genes. 

A syntenic candidate in the last of the six searched species, P. piratica , was identified 

among the statistically significant candidates obtained by the dm score. The score identified 

132 statistically significant candidates in the genome that was 5% of all IGRs in the genome. 

The candidate preserved the original polA/yihA synteny. The sequences and secondary 

structures of the candidates were included in Supplementary File S4 and Supplementary 

Figure S6. The broader genomic contexts of the candidates are sho wn in Supplementary 

Figure S5 .

Next, the syntenic candidates were tested for their evolutionary conservation. The 

candidate sequences were BLASTed against the refseq_genomes database in Alteromonadales 

order to limit the search to the related species. 

The six candidates had statistically significant sequence similarity to 41, 51, 49, 47, 36 

and 43 IGRs with spf synteny in related species for P. atlantica , P. maricaloris , P. marina , P. 

haloplanktis , P. simplex and P. piratica , respectively . The synteny of the IGRs with the 

sequence similarity was identified using the synteny -based filtering with the synteny phrases 

Ia and II and their filtering rules described above. The species in which the syntenic IGRs 

with sequence similarity was found are listed in Supplementary file S5. 

The species with sequence similarity to the syntenic candidates appeared to be only 

from the Pseudoalteromonadales genus. One exception was P. piratica whose syntenic 

candidate had sequence similarity also in other than Pseudoalteromonadales genus, in 

Flocullibacter . The BLAST of the Flocullibacter IGR sequence in Alteromonadales identified 

statistically significant sequence similarity in IGRs in 29 species of two Alteromonadales 

genera other than Pseudoalteromonadales , in Psychrosphaera and Alishewanella 

(Supplementary File S6) that were spf -syntenic (Supplementary File S7), thus further 

confirming the validity of the search. The broader genomic contexts of these IGRs are shown 

in Supplementary Figure S7. 

ms1 RNA genes in Frankia 

In this use case, the presented approach was applied to the identification of ms1 RNA 

genes in Frankia . The first step of this approach, the structure search, was applied to 2 5

Frankia genomes available in NCBI GenBank ( Supplementary Table S3 ). The template was 

the experimentally determined secondary structure of S. coelicolor ms1 RNA (29) .

Using the sm, s3, ss, dm and d* scores , the structure search identified in average 1 28, 63, 

24, 35 and 37 statistically significant candidates per genome that represented 3.9% 2% 0.9% 

1% and 1% of all IGRs in the genomes in average. 

Among these candidates, using synteny -based filtering, those with the ms1 -like 

syntenic genomic contexts were identified. The synteny phrase for ms1 RNA was derived 

from conserved genes in the genomic contexts of known ms1 RNA homologs in 

Actinomycetes (29) . The contexts of seven flanking genes in each genomic direction from the 

central ms1 RNA -containing IGR were analyzed. Among them the most conserved were the 

4th , 3 rd , 2 nd and 1 st genes on one side of the IGR and the 1 st gene on the other side, where the 

1st means the closest gene to the IGR. The genes were in the order 4th , 3 rd , 2 nd , 1 st //1 st , where 

‘//’ marks position of IGRs with ms1 RNA: ‘type II secretion system F’, ‘ TadA family 

conjugal transfer -associated ATPase’, ‘septum site -determining protein Ssd’, ‘ HAD -IB 

hydrolase’ or ‘HAD -IB phosphatase’//‘oxidoreductase’ or ‘Fic Filamentation induced by 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

cAMP family protein’ or ‘glycoside hydrolase’. 

Exceptions from this scheme occurred in a few Actinomycetes genera, but re peated 

among the species within those genera. These exceptions included the absence of the 1 st gene, 

“HAD -IB hydrolase/phosphatase”’ as observed, for example, in Actinomadura ; the absence of 

the 4 th gene, “type II secretion system F,” as observed, for exam ple, in Glycomyces and 

Micromonospora ; and replacement of either the 3 rd or 2 nd gene by “Flp pilus assembly protein 

ATPase CpaE/FlpE/TadZ,” as observed, for example, in Actinoalloteichus .

The synteny phrases derived from the annotations were as follows: 

II I. ‘TadA’ AND ‘Ssd’ AND {‘HAD -IB’ AND [‘hydrolase’ OR 

‘phosphatase’]}; 

IV. {‘oxidoreductase’ OR ‘Fic’} OR {‘glycoside’ AND 

‘hydrolase’} .

A genomic context of a statistically significant structure candidate was considered 

syntenic if strings of one phrase, separated in the phrases by the highest level AND, occurred 

in either the upstream or downstream part of the context at the appropriate p ositions of 

flanking genes in the matched context, while strings of the other phrase occurred at the 

appropriate positions of flanking genes in the matched context in the opposite part. 

Filtering the genomic contexts of statistically significant Frankia structure candidates 

using the full synteny phrase did not identify any candidate. Therefore, o nly the “HAD -IB” 

AND [“hydrolase” OR “phosphatase”] part of the phrase III, representing genes immediately 

adjacent to IGRs with structure candidates, was used in stead of the full phrase . Filtering using 

this part identified structure candidates in IGRs between “HAD -IB phosphatase” and “5′ –3′ 

exonuclease” genes in 6 of the 25 searched Frankia species (Supplementary Figure S8 ). 

Exonucleases are distantly functionall y related to glycoside hydrolases, suggesting that this 

genomic context may be functionally similar to the “HAD -IB 

hydrolase/phosphatase”//“glycoside hydrolase” context. 

Nevertheless, only 12 of the 25 searched Frankia species possessed IGRs between 

“HAD -IB phosphatase” and “5′ –3′ exonuclease” genes that were long enough to 

accommodate ms1 RNA genes. Note, that the length of S. coelicolor ms1 RNA is 227 

nucleotides, thus the IGRs with its gene should have at least 250 nucleotides. In the 13 

remaining specie s, ms1 RNA could not exist in these IGRs and also could not be detected. 

The occurrence of these suitable IGRs in only 12/25 Frankia species did not indicate 

evolutionary conservation. The lack of this sequence conservation agreed with the lack of 

statisti cally significant structure candidates that were identified in only 6 out of the 12 species 

with these long enough IGRs. Moreover, the broader contexts of these IGRs did not match the 

ms1 RNA synteny described above. 

It was therefore relevant to determine whether IGRs with statistically significant 

structure candidates occurred in genomic contexts that, as observed in e.g. Actinomadura ,

lacked HAD -IB hydrolase/phosphatase genes but still contained the other conserved genes of 

the ms1 RNA synteny. 

The contex ts of the structure candidates therefore were searched for occurrence of the 

keywords “Ssd” and “TadA”, which represent unambiguous signatures of two of the most 

conserved genes in the ms1 RNA synteny: “septum site -determining protein Ssd” and “TadA 

family conjugal transfer -associated ATPase”. Indeed, candidates in IGRs flanking with the 

succession of these two genes accompanied by “type II secretion system F family” were 

found. Such contexts matched the ms1 RNA synteny. But the structure candidates were 

id entified in only 3 such IGRs (Supplementary Figure S9), although IGRs with this context 

longer than 250 nucleotides, and therefore able to accommodate ms1 RNA genes, were 

present in 15 of the 25 searched Frankia species. Again, the structure candidates were too few 

to indicate evolutionarily conserved occurrence of homologous ms1 RNA structures in these 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

IGRs. 

Therefore, a broader search was performed for the genomic contexts of IGRs with 

structure candidates that were functionally or biologically related to the ms1 RNA synteny. 

This search did not rely on highly specific gene names as previously, but instead used 

keywords from annotations of genes within the ms1 RNA synteny that reflected the associated 

biological processes. Two such keywords were “ septum” and “ conjugal” . The contexts that 

would be identified using “ septum” keyword were already identified in the search above using 

the “Ssd” gene name . The “ conjugal” keyword, when not accompanied by “ TadA”, occurred 

in the “conjugal transfer protein TraC” annotations found in 14 contexts in 14 Frankia 

species. Using ChatGPT 5.5, these proteins were identified as functionally related members of 

distinct ATPase families (Supplementary File S 12 ), suggesting that genes a nnotated as 

“conjugal transfer protein TraC” may have occur ed in genomic contexts functionally related 

to ms1 RNA synteny. The sources included in the ChatGPT reports in supplementary files , as 

well as references retrieved by ChatGPT and used in this work, were manually validated. 

Some of the contexts containing the genes of TraC proteins , contained “MinD/ParA 

family ATP -binding protein” , that was adjacent to the IGRs with structure candidates. These 

proteins were found to be functional analogs of Ssd proteins and belong to the ParA –MinD 

ATPase superfamily, which includes septum -site -regulating proteins based on ChatGPT 5.5 

functional comparison ( Supplementary File S 13 ) (30) (31) . This classification further 

supported the evidence that the contexts containing the genes of TraC proteins and were 

functionally related to the ms1 synteny. 

The se MinD -containing context s, extending up to 6 genes in both directions from the 

“MinD” gene, consisted of the following annotations (the context from Frankia casuarinae 

used as an example) : “conjugal transfer protein TraC,” “SCO6880 family protein,” 

“hypothetical protein,” “hypothetical protein,” “DUF6112 family protein,” “MinD/ParA 

family ATP -binding protein,” “helix -turn -helix domain -containing protein,” “hypothetical 

protein,” “NlpC/P60 family protein,” “hypothetical protein,” and “FAD -binding 

oxid oreductase.” Functional and biological characterization of the genes in this context, based 

on both ChatGPT 5.5 functional analysis and sequence similarity of proteins produced by 

these genes to annotated genes in species in other Actinomycetes genera iden tified by Protein 

BLAST searches in NCBI, indicated that these contexts were related to septum -site -,

conjugation -, and secretion -related cellular processes (Table 2) i.e. to the same cellular 

processes as the genes in the ms1 RNA synteny. 

Table 2 Search for annotated homologs for genes in the MinD -containing contexts using 

similarity -based analysis by BLAST in Actinomycetes . The search is demonstrated here with 

Frankia casuarinae . Some genes could have different annotations in different species. 

MinD -context 

genes 

F. 

casuarina 

e IDs 

Similar to proteins with 

these annotations 1 Function characteristics 

conjugal 

transfer 

protein TraC 

WP_0114 

34510  -

conjugation, secretion, pilus as sembly, 

or related macromolecular transfer 

(Supplementary File S12 2)

SCO6880 

family protein 

WP_0114 

34511 

type VII secretion protein 

EccE, components of 

secretion system 

(Supplementary File S15) 

uncharacterized function 

(Supplementary File S14) 

hypothetical 

protein or 

TrbL/VirB6 

WP_0114 

34512  TrbL/VirB6 family protein 

membrane proteins, components of the 

Type IV secretion system (T4SS), these 

systems are used by bacteria to: 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

family protein  transfer DNA between cells 

(conjugation), secrete proteins , or 

inject molecules into host cells 

(Supplementary File S14) 

hypothetical 

protein 

WP_0114 

34513  RAD23 family protein  DNA repair and protein degradation 

pathways (Supplementary File S14) 

DUF6112 

family protein 

WP_0114 

34514 

TrbC/VirB2 family protein, 

memb rane protein 

putative Type IV secretion system 

major pilin/conjugative pilus subunit 

(Supplementary File S14) 

MinD/ParA 

family ATP -

binding 

protein or 

hypothetical 

protein 

WP_ 0238 

40585 

CpaE/TadZ family protein, 

septum site -determining 

protein MinD, MinD/ ParA 

family ATP -binding protein 

pilus formation and attachment , cell 

division site selection / septum 

positioning ( Supplementary File S13) 

helix -turn -

helix domain -

containing 

protein 

WP_0238 

40587 

DNA -binding protein, 

excisionase family, 

methylation -associated 

defense system helix -turn -

helix domain -containing 

protein MAD1? 

predicted excisionase -family DNA -

binding protein associated with mobile 

genetic element recombination. Both 

annotations are for proteins that may 

both be part o f a broader phage -defense 

/ mobile genetic element region ,

especially if the genes are adjacent or 

occur in the same genomic island 

(Supplementary File S15). 

hypothetical 

protein 

WP_0238 

40588  Cif family virulence factor? 

Virulence factor / host -cell modul ation 

/ possible Type III secretion effector 

(Supplementary File S15) 

NlpC/P60 

family protein 

WP_0114 

34517  C40 family peptidase 

peptidoglycan hydrolase involved in 

cell -wall remodeling , cell division, 

septum degradation during cytokinesis ,

peptidoglycan recycling 

(Supplementary File S15) 

hypothetical 

protein 

WP_0238 

40589  YjjA family protein? 

Protein of unknown function; possible 

cell -envelope/periplasmic role 

(Supplementary File S15) 

FAD -binding 

oxidoreductas 

e

WP_0114 

34519  - - 

> 1

identified by Protein BLAST of F. casuarinae proteins  

> 2

Analyses in Supplementary Files S12 -S15 were obtained by ChatGPT 5.5. 

- was not applied, not necessary, the annotations are self -explanatory in terms of protein 

function 

? annotation with weak BLA ST hit 

The synteny phrases were constructed for identification of these contexts among 

genomic contexts of structure candidates in the analyzed Frankia species :

V. ‘NlpC/P60 ’ OR ‘ helix -turn -helix ’ OR [‘FAD AND 

‘oxidoreductase’]; 

VI. [‘ MinD’ OR ‘ParA’] OR ‘SCO6880’ OR [‘TraC’ OR 

‘conjugal’]. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

The filtering rule was the same as for the phrases III and IV: at least one string of each 

phrase had to appear in either the upstream or downstream part from the IGR with a structure 

candidate in the matched context, while they have to appear in opposite parts. 

In 7 of the 25 species, namely Frankia gtarii , tisae , alpine , sp. KB5 , EI5c , Hr75 , RB7 ,

the IGRs with contexts corresponding the synteny phrases V an VI were split between contigs 

and therefore could not be sea rched for the ms1 RNA structure. In one Frankia species, Cj5 ,

this IGR was not long enough . Therefore only 17 analyzed Frankia species had IGR s

corresponding the synteny phrases V an VI long enough to theoretically accommodate 

putative homologs of the 227 -nucleotide -long S. coelicolor ms1 RNA . Of these 17 Frankia 

species, 14 had statistically significant structure candidates in IGRs corresponding the synteny 

phrases V an VI (Figure 4). 

Figure 4. Broader genomic contexts of genes of Frankia ms1 RNA homologs 

predicted using the presented approach. The contexts are organized in rows of boxes beneath 

each other. The boxes mark genes, the spaces between them IGRs. The lengths of both do not 

correspond to the lengths of genes and IGRs. The boxes contain s hortcuts of gene annotations, 

shown in full in the legend. The contexts consist of 14 genes, 7 genes in each of the genomic 

directions from the central IGRs with predicted homologs. If the genes were not available in 

annotations, the appropriate positions in the contexts are empty. Colored boxes show genes 

complying with ms1 RNA synteny. The gene annotations corresponding to the colors are 

shown in the legend. 

Structure candidates were positioned in these contexts between “helix -turn -helix 

domain -containin g protein” genes and one of these: “MinD/ParA family ATP -binding 

protein”, “ParA family protein”, “CpaE/TadZ family protein” and “hypothetical protein’. The 

hypothetical proteins in these contexts exhibited statistical ly significant sequence similarity to 

the MinD/ParA family protein -annotated genes in other Actinomycetes species, when 

examined with Protein BLAST in NCBI (not shown). The predicted secondary structures of 

these candidates were highly similar to the S. coelicolor ms1 RNA template and were als o the 

best -scoring structures in all 14 Frankia species ( their plots were included in Supplementary 

Figure S10). 

Sequence similarity of the syntenic candidates in related species was examined using 

NCBI BLASTn Web. Statistically significant hits were obta ined in multiple species for each 

of the candidates , conf irming the ir evolutionary conservation . The s pecies in which the 

candidates had statistically significant sequence similarity are shown in Supplementary File 

S8. The sequences and secondary structure s in dot -bracket format of the predicted homologs 

are provided in Supplementary File S7. 

Interestingly, when “MinD ” keyword was searched in Frankia genomic annotations, 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

another “MinD” gene -containing genomic context was found that matched the biological a nd 

functional characteristics of the ms1 RNA synteny. This context consisted of the following 

annotations: “TadE family protein,” “hypothetical protein,” “type II secretion system F family 

protein,” “type II secretion system F family protein,” “CpaF family protein,” “MinD/ParA 

family ATP -binding protein,” “SAF domain -containing protein,” “ATP/GTP -binding 

protein,” “hypothetical protein,” “hypothetical protein,” and “2′ -5′ RNA ligase family 

protein.” It was directly related to bacterial pilus assembly throug h the CpaF family proteins 

and indirectly related to conjugation through the TadE family proteins. Nevertheless, these 

contexts could not harbor homologous ms1 RNA genes in the IGRs flanking the “MinD/ParA 

family ATP -binding protein” gene, because they wer e not long enough in any of the 25 

analyzed Frankia species. 

Note that the keywords used to search the annotations were highly specific. They 

occurred on average only once or twice per genome, unlike terms such as “oxidoreductase” or 

other annotations that are ubiquitous throughout genomes . The keywords “TadA” and “Ssd,” 

which represented unambiguous signatures of two of the most conserved genes in the ms1 

RNA synteny, “TadA family conjugal transfer -associated ATPase” and “septum site -

determining protein Ss d”, occurred in 23 and 20 of the 25 searched Frankia species, 

respectively, and were adjacent to each other in 19 species. The “septum” keyword occurred 

66 times in genomic annotations of the 25 Frankia species, 20 times in the “septum site -

determining pr otein Ssd”. The 46 remaining occurrences were found in contexts clearly 

unrelated to the ms1 RNA synteny (not shown). The “conjugal” keyword, when not in “TadA 

family conjugal transfer -associated ATPase”, occurred in 23 of the 25 species. In 22 of these 

23 occurrences, it appeared in the annotation “conjugal transfer protein TraC.” 

The conclusion stemming from this brief search in Frankia genomic annotations was 

that these septum -site -, conjugation -, and secretion -related contexts are specific in Frankia 

genomes and that the occurrence of the statistically significant structure candidates in them 

was not random. 

ms1 RNA genes in Bifidobacterium 

In this use case, the presented approach was applied to the identification of ms1 RNA 

genes in Bifidobacterium . The structure search was performed on genomes of 22 

Bifidobacterium species available in NCBI GenBank ( Supplementary Table S3 ). The template 

was the experimentally determined secondary structure of S. coelicolor ms1 RNA (29) .

Using the sm score, structure candidates in 20 of the 22 inspected species were 

identified. The search identified in average 33 statistically significant structure candidates per 

searched genome, which was in average 4% of all IGRs in the searched genomes. 

The candidates were subjected to the synteny -based filtering. It followed the filtering 

procedure applied in Fra nkia . First, the original synteny phrases III and IV were used. As 

‘HAD -IB hydrolase’ did not occur in Bifidobacterium , ‘HAD hydrolase’ was used instead. 

No candidate was found using either full phrases or the “HAD -IB” AND [“hydrolase” OR 

“phosphatase”] part of the phrase III. 

Therefore as in Frankia , the synteny filtering using the rest of the original ms1 RNA 

synteny was applied. The septum site -determining Ssd proteins did not occur in the searched 

Bifidobacterium genomes. Instead there was ‘CpaE/TadZ family protein’ followed by ‘TadA 

family conjugal transfer -associated ATPase’ and one or two copies of ‘type II secretion 

system F family protein’, which as in Frankia represented the most conserved part of the 

original ms1 RNA synteny shown above. In som e Bifidobacterium species, instead of 

CpaE/TadZ family proteins, there was either the P -loop NTPase or AAA family ATPase 

annotations that are broader, less specific annotations that may encompass or overlap with 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

CpaE/TadZ -family proteins (Supplementary Fil e S18). The CpaE/TadZ family proteins are 

related to the Ssd/MinD/ParA -like se ptum site -determining ATPases (32) (Supplementary 

File S19). Also, TadA -family conjugal transfer -associated ATPases were annotated in some 

Bifidobacterium species as CpaE family proteins, as their more general classification is 

CpaF/TadA -like pilus assembl y ATPases (KEGG entry F6J84_03795). Then, the following 

phrase was constructed and used in synteny filtering: 

VII. [ 'CpaE' OR 'P -loop NTPase' OR 'AAA family ATPase'] 

AND ['CpaF' OR 'TadA'] AND ‘type II secretion system F’. 

The filtering rule required that OR operator -separated substrings from all three AND -

separated strings has to be found in the annotations of the corresponding genes in the genomic 

contexts of IGRs with structure candidates, with the gene matching the “CpaE” -containing 

string flanking the IGR. 

This phrase was identified in genomic contexts of 14 of the 22 analyzed 

Bifidobacterium species, in which the candidates were in the IGRs flanking the CpaE/TadZ 

family proteins (Figure 5). Of the 22 analyzed Bifidobacterium species, 20 had these 

CpaE /TadZ family proteins –flanking IGRs long enough to theoretically accommodate 

putative homologs of the 227 -nucleotide -long S. coelicolor ms1 RNA. 

Figure 5. Genomic contexts of genes of Bifidobacterium ms1 RNA homologs 

predicted using the presented appro ach. The contexts are organized in rows of boxes beneath 

each other. The boxes mark genes, the spaces between them IGRs. The lengths of both do not 

correspond to the lengths of genes and IGRs. The boxes contain shortcuts of gene annotations, 

shown in full in the legend. The contexts consist of 14 genes, 7 genes in each of the genomic 

directions from the central IGRs with predicted homologs. If the genes were not available in 

annotations, the appropriate positions in the contexts are empty. Colored boxes sho w genes 

complying with ms1 RNA synteny. The gene annotations corresponding to the colors are 

shown in the legend. 

Using the ss score, statistically significant structure candidates were identified i n

another 2 species, B. animalis and B. boum , with the precision of 24 statistically significant 

structure candidates per searched genome in average, which was 3% of all IGRs in average in 

the searched genomes. Both the candidates were found syntenic using the above described 

synteny filtering procedu re. 

In the four Bifidobacterium species without statistically significant structure 

candidates, no candidates were identified using the remaining scores. 

Sequence similarity of the syntenic candidates in related species was examined using 

NCBI BLASTn Web. Statistically significant hits were obtained in multiple species for each 

of the candidates, confirming their evolutionary conservation. The species in which the 

candidates had statistically significant sequence similarity are shown in Supplementary File 

S10 .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

The sequences and secondary structures in dot -bracket format of the predicted 

homologs are provided in Supplementary File S 9 and secondary structure plots are in 

Supplementary Figure S11 .

DISCUSSION 

The identification of homologous bacterial ncRNAs remains challenging when 

sequence similarity is weak or absent, particularly for short regulatory RNAs whose 

functional constraints may be imposed more strongly on secondary structure, genomic 

context, or evolutionary conservation than on primary sequence . In this study, we present an 

integrative bioinformatic approach that combines genome -wide structural similarity searches 

based on suboptimal RNA secondary structures with synteny -based filtering and comparative 

conservation analysis. The results show tha t these complementary criteria can identify 

plausible ncRNA homologs in bacterial genomes in cases where conventional sequence -based 

approaches had previously failed. 

A central feature of the presented approach is the use of suboptimal secondary 

structures rather than reliance on a single minimum free energy structure. This is important 

because bacterial ncRNAs may populate multiple structurally plausible conformations, and 

experimentally observed structures are not always identical to the predicted MFE fold. By 

comparing ensembles of suboptimal structures with a template structure, the algorithm 

evaluates whether a genomic sequence has the capacity to adopt a fold compa tible with the 

query ncRNA. This ensemble -based strategy is especially relevant for ncRNAs whose 

function depends on conserved structural elements despite extensive sequence divergence. 

The successful identification of known homologs in the validation sear ches supports the 

usefulness of this principle and indicates that structural information can extend the detectable 

evolutionary range of ncRNA homology searches beyond sequence similarity alone. 

The validation searches demonstrated that structural similari ty alone can substantially 

reduce the genomic search space. Across the test searches, the best -performing scores 

identified most known homologs as statistically significant candidates, while reducing 

thousands of intergenic regions to a smaller set of cand idate loci. Among the tested scores, s m

and s 3 showed the highest recovery of known homologs, suggesting that scores based on the 

behavior of multiple suboptimal structures are particularly informative. This result supports 

the assumption that ncRNA homologs may be better represented by structural tendencies 

across an ensemble than by a single best -matching predicted structure. At the same time, the 

number of false -positive candidates generated by structure search alone remained too high for 

confiden t homolog identification. This outcome is expected in genome -wide RNA structure 

searches because local sequences may form structures resembling a query RNA by chance. 

Thus, structural similarity is a powerful enrichment step, but it is not sufficient as a stand -

alone criterion for final annotation. 

The addition of synteny -based filtering addressed this limitation by incorporating 

independent biological information. In bacteria, conserved genomic neighborhoods often 

reflect shared evolutionary history, funct ional linkage, or constraints on local genome 

organization. Therefore, a structurally similar candidate located in a genomic context related 

to that of known homologs is more likely to represent a true homolog than a structurally 

similar candidate located in an unrelated region. The phrase -based synteny strategy used here 

offers a flexible way to exploit genome annotations without requiring strict conservation of 

gene order or exact annotation wording. This flexibility is important because bacterial 

genomes frequently undergo local rearrangements, gene insertions, deletions, and annotation 

changes. By allowing partial synteny and alternative annotation terms, the method can retain 

candidates in evolutionarily modified but biologically related genomic context s. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Evolutionary conservation provided a third level of support. Candidate loci that are 

structurally similar to the query ncRNA, occur in syntenic genomic contexts, and are 

conserved among related species are unlikely to represent isolated structural artif acts. This 

was particularly evident in the use cases. Predicted spf homologs in Glaciecola and 

Pseudoalteromonas were supported not only by structural similarity to the Escherichia coli 

Spot 42 RNA template, but also by conservation of genomic neighborhood s involving genes 

such as polA and yihA/ysxC . In several cases, the original syntenic arrangement was retained, 

whereas in others only partial synteny remained because of intervening genes or local 

rearrangements. The ability of the approach to accommodate these rearrangements was 

essential for detecting candidates that would otherwise have been missed by a stricter synteny 

requirement. 

The Pseudoalteromonas use case further illustrates the value of adaptive synteny 

interpretation. In several species, conse rved inserted genes occurred between the canonical 

spf -associated flanking genes, indicating that the local genomic context had evolved in a 

genus -specific manner. By modifying the synteny phrase to include this conserved derived 

context, additional candid ates could be identified. This finding highlights an important 

practical aspect of bacterial ncRNA homology searches: synteny is often conserved at the 

level of a genomic neighborhood rather than as a perfectly preserved pair of immediately 

adjacent genes. The detection of related syntenic loci in additional Alteromonadales species 

also suggests that the predicted spf homologs are part of a broader conserved evolutionary 

pattern rather than isolated predictions. 

The prediction of genes of ms1 RNA homologs i n Frankia and Bifidobacterium 

represents a more challenging case and demonstrates both the potential and the interpretative 

complexity of the method. In these genera, previous sequence - and synteny -based searches 

had not identified ms1 homologs (24,29) . The presented approach dete cted structurally 

significant candidates in genomic contexts that were not identical to the canonical ms1 

synteny known from other Actinomycetes , but that were functionally and biologically related 

to it. In Frankia , candidates were found near genes associ ated with septum -site regulation, 

conjugation, secretion -related processes, and oxidoreductase functions. Although these 

contexts differed from the original ms1 neighborhood, they contained genes with functional 

relationships to conserved components of the known ms1 synteny. The recurrence of these 

contexts across multiple species and the presence of highly similar predicted secondary 

structures support the interpretation that these loci may encode divergent ms1 RNA 

homologs. 

Similarly, in Bifidobacterium , predicted ms1 homologs were associated with genomic 

neighborhoods containing CpaE/TadZ -family proteins, TadA - or CpaF -related proteins, and 

type II secretion system F -family proteins. These genes are related to cellular processes 

represented in the broader ms1 syntenic context, even though the exact gene composition 

differed from that observed in other Actinomycetes . Thi s result suggests that homologous 

ncRNAs may be preserved within functionally equivalent or evolutionarily remodeled 

genomic contexts. For divergent bacterial lineages, such functional -context conservation may 

be more informative than strict conservation o f individual gene names or gene order. 

The Frankia and Bifidobacterium use cases illustrate both the practical value and the 

necessary limitations of AI -assisted comparative genomics. Conventional structure - and 

synteny -based filtering initially failed to recover a convincing s et of ms1 gene candidates in 

Frankia , largely because the genomic contexts differed from the canonical ms1 RNA synteny 

described in other Actinomycetes . In this situation, ChatGPT 5.5 was not used as a stand -alone 

prediction tool, but rather as a hypothesis -generating aid to recognize functional relationships 

among heterogeneous gene annotations. By comparing the biological processes represented in 

the known ms1 RNA synteny with the genomic contexts of structural candidates in Frankia ,

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

the AI analysis highlighted contexts associated with septum -site regulation, conjugation, 

secretion, and pilus assembly, even when the specific gene names differed from those in the 

original synteny model. These suggestions guided subsequent conventional searches using 

biologically meaningful keywords such as “conjugal,” “TraC,” “MinD,” and “ParA,” which 

led to the identification of a conserved MinD/ParA -flanked context containing the best -

scoring ms1 -like structural candidates in most Frankia species with suitable IGRs. 

Importantly, the AI -derived hints were validated by independent keyword -based annotation 

searches, BLAST analyses, structural scoring, and sequence conservation among related 

species. Thus, the use of AI did not replace standard bioinformat ic validation, but expanded 

the search space by helping to interpret functionally equivalent yet annotation -divergent 

genomic contexts. This demonstrates that large language models can be useful in RNA gene 

discovery when applied cautiously as tools for bi ological reasoning and annotation synthesis, 

provided that all AI -generated hypotheses are subjected to reproducible, conventional 

computational verification. 

However, when ChatGPT 5.5 was initially used to identify complete genomic contexts 

consisting of 14 gene annotations, with the predicted structural candidates positioned 

centrally, it failed to recover contexts biologically or functionally related to the ms1 synteny. 

Instead of evaluating the functional characterization of each context as a whole, it rather 

identified related contexts based on matches to individual annotations, often driven by shared 

wording rather than biological relevance (see Supplementary Files S16 and S17 for 

examples). In this task, ChatGPT largely behaved like the keyword -based text search 

described here. This suggests that reliable genomic context matching would require 

foundation LLMs specifically trained or adapted for annotation -based context comparison 

with explicit ly specified relevant genomic data sources . W hile this resu lt highlights a 

limitation of commercial general -purpose LLMs in genomic context -matching tasks, 

ChatGPT 5.5 was nevertheless highly useful for inferring biological and functional 

relationships between proteins from genomic annotations, saving days or week s of detailed 

manual work. 

The use cases also show that the method can generate biologically testable hypotheses. 

The predicted homolog ous spf and ms1 genes are supported by convergent computational 

evidence, but experimental validation remains necessary. Northern blotting, RT -PCR, RNA -

seq -based expression analysis, or targeted transcript mapping could confirm whether the 

predicted loci are transcribed. Structural probing could evaluate whether the predicted RNAs 

adopt the proposed folds in vitro or in vivo . Functional studies, such as deletion or 

overexpression experiments, would be required to determine whether the predicted homologs 

perform roles comparable to known Spot 42 or ms1 RNAs. Thus, the presented approach 

should be viewed as a prioritization fra mework for candidate discovery rather than a 

replacement for experimental characterization. 

Several limitations should be considered. First, the performance of the structure search 

depends on the quality of the template structure. Experimentally determined structures are 

preferable, but they are available only for a limited number of bacterial ncRNAs. The 

validation results suggest that predicted structures can also be useful as templates, but this 

conclusion was based on a limited number of cases and shoul d be examined further. Second, 

the approach depends on genome annotation quality for synteny filtering. Inconsistent, 

incomplete, or overly general annotations may obscure true syntenic relationships or produce 

misleading phrase matches. Third, although ph rase -based synteny filtering is flexible, it 

requires careful biological interpretation, especially when moving from strict gene -name 

conservation to broader functional -context conservation. This is particularly relevant for the 

ms1 predictions in Frankia and Bifidobacterium , where the inferred synteny is based on 

functional relatedness rather than exact conservation of the canonical context. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Another limitation is that the statistical evaluation of structural candidates is 

performed within individual genome s. This enables genome -specific ranking of candidate 

intergenic regions, but it does not by itself establish that a candidate is homologous to the 

query ncRNA. The false -positive rates observed in the validation searches show that 

structurally significant candidates can occur by chance. The integration of synteny and 

conservation reduces this problem, but it does not eliminate it entirely. Future improvements 

could include more formal models that combine structural score, syntenic evidence, 

conservation acr oss taxa, sequence similarity among candidates, and genomic distance 

relationships into a single probabilistic framework. 

The algorithm was also shown to be responsive to sliding -window length, which can 

be both a strength and a limitation. Length responsi veness may help estimate the likely 

boundaries of candidate ncRNAs and distinguish windows that best accommodate the 

conserved fold. However, it also means that searches for homologs with substantially 

different lengths from the query require careful param eter selection. Future versions of the 

method could implement adaptive window sizes or multi -scale scanning to better detect 

homologs with insertions, deletions, or lineage -specific expansions. 

Despite these limitations, the presented approach provides a u seful framework for the 

discovery of structurally conserved bacterial ncRNAs. Its main advantage lies in the 

integration of three independent but complementary signals. Structural similarity identifies 

candidate loci with the potential to adopt a query -lik e fold. Synteny filtering evaluates 

whether those loci occur in biologically plausible genomic contexts. Evolutionary 

conservation then tests whether candidates are preserved across related species. Each layer 

reduces uncertainty introduced by the others, resulting in a more robust strategy than searches 

based on sequence, structure, synteny, or conservation alone. 

In conclusion, the results demonstrate that suboptimal secondary structure analysis, 

when combined with genomic synteny and evolutionary conserv ation, can identify bacterial 

ncRNA homologs beyond the reach of conventional sequence or sequence -structure similarity 

searches. The predicted spf homologs in Glaciecola and Pseudoalteromonas and the predicted 

ms1 homologs in Frankia and Bifidobacterium expand the candidate distribution of these 

ncRNA families and provide targets for future experimental validation. More broadly, this 

work supports the use of integrative, context -aware approaches for ncRNA discovery in 

bacterial genomes, especially for dive rgent homologs whose evolutionary conservation is 

retained primarily at the levels of structure and genomic organization. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

All data are incorporated into the article and its online supplementary material. 

SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 

Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The author thanks J iří Vohradský for reading  the manuscript. 

Authors contribution : JP is the only author of the presented work. 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

None declared. 

FUNDING 

This research has been supported by ELIXIR CZ Research Infrastructure (ID 

LM2023055, MEYS CR). 

REFERENCES 

1. Storz, G., Vogel, J. and Wassarman, K.M. (2011) Regulation by small RNAs in bacteria: 

expanding frontiers. Mol Cell , 43 , 880 -891. 

2. Eddy, S.R. and Durbin, R. (1994) RNA sequence analysis using covariance models. Nucleic 

Acids Res , 22 , 2079 -2088. 

3. Washietl, S., Hofacker, I.L. and Stadler, P.F. (2005) Fast and reliable prediction of noncoding 

RNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 102 , 2454 -2459. 

4. Nawrocki, E.P. and Eddy, S.R. (2013) Infernal 1.1: 100 -fold faster RNA homology searches. 

Bioinformatics , 29 , 2933 -2935. 

5. Wuchty, S., Fontana, W., Hofacker, I.L. and Schuster, P. (1999) Complete suboptimal folding 

of RNA and the stability of seco ndary structures. Biopolymers , 49 , 145 -165. 

6. Aghaeepour, N. and Hoos, H.H. (2013) Ensemble -based prediction of RNA secondary 

structures. BMC Bioinformatics , 14 , 139. 

7. Spasic, A., Assmann, S.M., Bevilacqua, P.C. and Mathews, D.H. (2018) Modeling RNA 

sec ondary structure folding ensembles using SHAPE mapping data. Nucleic Acids Res , 46 ,

314 -323. 

8. Schroeder, S.J. (2018) Challenges and approaches to predicting RNA with multiple functional 

structures. RNA , 24 , 1615 -1624. 

9. Rouskin, S., Zubradt, M., Washiet l, S., Kellis, M. and Weissman, J.S. (2014) Genome -wide 

probing of RNA structure reveals active unfolding of mRNA structures in vivo. Nature , 505 ,

701 -705. 

10. Leamy, K.A., Assmann, S.M., Mathews, D.H. and Bevilacqua, P.C. (2016) Bridging the gap 

between i n vitro and in vivo RNA folding Q Rev Biophys , Jan: 49 .

11. Tieng, F.Y.F., Abdullah -Zawawi, M.R., Md Shahri, N.A.A., Mohamed -Hussein, Z.A., Lee, L.H. 

and Mutalib, N.A. (2023) A Hitchhiker's guide to RNA -RNA structure and interaction 

prediction tools. Brie f Bioinform , 25 .

12. Bose, R., Saleem, I. and Mustoe, A.M. (2024) Causes, functions, and therapeutic possibilities 

of RNA secondary structure ensembles and alternative states. Cell Chem Biol , 31 , 17 -35. 

13. Panek, J., Krasny, L., Bobek, J., Jezkova, E., Ko relusova, J. and Vohradsky, J. (2011) The 

suboptimal structures find the optimal RNAs: homology search for bacterial non -coding RNAs 

using suboptimal RNA structures. Nucleic Acids Res , 39 , 3418 -3426. 

14. Liu, J., Wang, J.T., Hu, J. and Tian, B. (2005) A me thod for aligning RNA secondary structures 

and its application to RNA motif detection. BMC Bioinformatics , 6, 89. 

15. Vicens, Q. and Kieft, J.S. (2022) Thoughts on how to think (and talk) about RNA structure. 

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 119 , e2112677119. 

16. Zuker, M. (1989) On finding all suboptimal foldings of an RNA molecule. Science , 244 , 48 -52. 

17. Zuker, M. (1994) Prediction of RNA secondary structure by energy minimization. Methods 

Mol Biol , 25 , 267 -294. 

18. Fu, H., Yang, L. and Zhang, X. (2015) An RNA secondary structure prediction method based on 

minimum and suboptimal free energy structures. J Theor Biol , 380 , 473 -479. 

19. Woods, C.T., Lackey, L., Williams, B., Dokholyan, N.V., Gotz, D. and Laederach, A. (2017) 

Comparative Visualization of the RNA Su boptimal Conformational Ensemble In Vivo. Biophys 

J, 113 , 290 -301. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737749 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

20. Reuter, J.S. and Mathews, D.H. (2010) RNAstructure: software for RNA secondary structure 

prediction and analysis. BMC Bioinformatics , 11 , 129. 

21. Uzilov, A.V., Keegan, J.M. and Mathews, D.H. (2006) Detection of non -coding RNAs on the 

basis of predicted secondary structure formation free energy change. BMC Bioinformatics , 7,

173. 

22. Sridhar, J., Kumar, S.S. and Rafi, Z.A. (2009) Small RNA identifica tion in Enterobacteriaceae 

using synteny and genomic backbone retention II. OMICS , 13 , 261 -284. 

23. Junier, I. and Rivoire, O. (2013) Synteny in Bacterial Genomes: Inference, Organization and 

Evolution. 

24. Ontiveros -Palacios, N., Cooke, E., Nawrocki, E.P. , Triebel, S., Marz, M., Rivas, E., Griffiths -

Jones, S., Petrov, A.I., Bateman, A. and Sweeney, B. (2025) Rfam 15: RNA families database in 

2025. Nucleic Acids Res , 53 , D258 -D267. 

25. Berman, H.M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T.N., Weissi g, H., Shindyalov, I.N. 

and Bourne, P.E. (2000) The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res , 28 , 235 -242. 

26. Korf, I., Yandell, M. and Bedell, J. (2003) BLAST . O'Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol. 

27. Baekkedal, C. and Haugen, P. (2015) The Spot 42 RNA: A regu latory small RNA with roles in 

the central metabolism. RNA Biol , 12 , 1071 -1077. 

28. Griffiths -Jones, S., Bateman, A., Marshall, M., Khanna, A. and Eddy, S.R. (2003) Rfam: an RNA 

family database. Nucleic Acids Res , 31 , 439 -441. 

29. Vankova Hausnerova, V., Marvalova, O., Sikova, M., Shoman, M., Havelkova, J., Kambova, M., 

Janouskova, M., Kumar, D., Halada, P., Schwarz, M. et al. (2022) Ms1 RNA Interacts With the 

RNA Polymerase Core in Streptomyces coelicolor and Was Identified in Majority of 

Actinobacteria U sing a Linguistic Gene Synteny Search. Front Microbiol , 13 , 848536. 

30. Kishore, V., Gaiwala Sharma, S.S. and Raghunand, T.R. (2023) Septum site placement in 

Mycobacteria - identification and characterisation of mycobacterial homologues of 

Escherichia coli MinD. Microbiology (Reading) , 169 .

31. England, K., Crew, R. and Slayden, R.A. (2011) Mycobacterium tuberculosis septum site 

determining protein, Ssd encoded by rv3660c, promotes filamentation and elicits an 

alternative metabolic and dormancy stress respo nse. BMC Microbiol , 11 , 79. 

32. Lutkenhaus, J. (2012) The ParA/MinD family puts things in their place. Trends Microbiol , 20 ,

411 -418.